Matter of M.S. (N.Y. 2026)
Court: New York Court of Appeals

Citation: 2026 NY Slip Op 00825

Docket Number: 7

Date Decided: February 17, 2026



Justia Opinion Summary
M.H. is the mother of two children, M.S. and G.H. In 2022, Erie County Department of Social Services
initiated abuse proceedings against M.H. and her former boyfriend, D.K., after videos surfaced appearing to
show D.K. sexually abusing M.S. The videos, dated from 2019, were not found in the family home but rather
on the computer of B.W., an individual in Syracuse who claimed to have hacked into the family's security
cameras and who was under investigation for trading child pornography. The FBI recovered the videos, which
depicted incidents in the family’s living room. Neither child disclosed abuse during interviews; M.S. denied
any sexual contact, and G.H. was unaware of any abuse. The police collected photographs of the home that
matched details in the videos, and M.H. identified the people in screenshots as D.K. and M.S.

Erie County Family Court admitted the videos into evidence over objection, relying on testimony from the FBI
agent who recovered the videos and a police investigator who confirmed the setting matched the family home.
The court found that M.H. had abused M.S. by failing to protect her from D.K. and derivatively abused G.H.
Both children were placed in foster care, and M.H.’s contact was limited to supervised visits. The Appellate
Division affirmed, holding that any uncertainty regarding the videos’ authenticity went to their weight and not
their admissibility.

The New York Court of Appeals reviewed the case. The Court held that the videos were not properly
authenticated because Erie County failed to provide sufficient evidence establishing their reliability. Unlike in
prior cases where authentication was found lacking, here the videos’ chain of custody was more tenuous and
the testimony presented did not meet the threshold required for authentication. As a result, the Court
reversed the orders of the Appellate Division and dismissed the petitions against M.H.

                                                                                                      Read more


Want to stay in the know about new opinions from the New York Court of Appeals?
 We up
Sign usefor
         cookies
            free to improve the
                 summaries      experience
                            delivered      of to
                                      directlyouryour
                                                  website. ByLearn
                                                      inbox. continuing
                                                                   Moreto› use our
 website, you consent to the use of cookies. To understand more about how we use          Accept & Continue
 cookies, please see our Privacy Policy.
                                              Matter of M.S. (M.H.)
                                              2026 NY Slip Op 00825
                                           Decided on February 17, 2026
                                                  Court of Appeals
                                                Wilson, Chief Judge
              Published by New York State Law Reporting Bureau pursuant to Judiciary Law § 431.
          This opinion is uncorrected and subject to revision before publication in the Official Reports.



Decided on February 17, 2026



No. 7


                                            [*1]In the Matter of M.S.




Erie County Department of Social Services, Respondent; M.H., & c., Appellant. (And Another Proceeding.)


Emily S. Wall, for appellant.

Madison L. Ozzella, for respondent.

David J. Pajak, attorney for child G.H.

Center for Integrity in Forensic Sciences, Brooklyn Defender Services et al., Just Making a Change for Families,
amici curiae.




WILSON, Chief Judge

Appellant M.H. has a daughter, M.S., and a son, G.H. Family Court found that she abused M.S. and derivatively
abused G.H. The court's findings were entirely based on videos that appeared to show M.H.'s former live-in
boyfriend, D.K., sexually abusing M.S. Family Court determined that M.H. had abused both her children by
failing to protect them from D.K. Because the foundation offered for the videos was insufficient, we hold that
Family Court erred in admitting the videos into evidence and therefore reverse.

  We use cookies to improve the experience of our website.I. By continuing to use our
  website, you consent to the use of cookies. To understand more about how we use          Accept & Continue
  cookies, please see our Privacy Policy.
In February 2022, Erie County filed concurrent Family Court article 10 petitions against M.H. and D.K., alleging
they had abused both children. In three videos bearing timestamps showing dates in May, June and July 2019,
D.K. appears to be engaged in sexual contact with M.S. on the couch in the living room. M.S. was 14 in 2019. In
one of the three videos, M.H. can be seen leaving the room a few minutes before D.K. is shown touching and
caressing M.S.

The videos were not discovered in the family home or on any camera or computer belonging to D.K. or M.H.
Instead, in the course of an FBI investigation into persons suspected of trading child pornography, the agents
executed a search warrant on B.W., who lived in Syracuse. In the course of questioning by FBI Agent Martin
[*2]Baranski, B.W., though not under oath or in any sworn statement, said (according to Agent Baranski's
recollection) that he had been "hack[ing] into security web cameras for the past few years." B.W. further stated
that in 2019 he had "hacked into a security camera" which showed what he thought was an adult male sexually
abusing the man's 15-year-old stepdaughter. B.W. claimed that he "watched a lot of the security camera footage
of this house" and saw "a lot" of interactions between the individuals depicted in the videos. He told Agent
Baranski he had saved some videos from that camera in a particular location on his computer, along with a
screenshot that contained details about the security camera login information, including a possible name, email
and IP address.

Searching a digital copy of B.W.'s computer, Agent Baranski found three videos that appeared to show an adult
male sexually abusing a young girl; the videos contained timestamps indicating they were recorded around the
summer of 2019. Based on information from the screenshot on the suspect's computer and other investigative
work, Agent Baranski was able to identify D.K.'s name and workplace; he then relayed that information to New
York law enforcement. After attempting to match photographs of D.K. and M.S. to people shown in the videos,
state police called M.H. and told her they "wanted to speak to her regarding her daughter with some internet
usage." They met with her in person and provided her with screenshots of two people taken from the videos.
M.H. told police that the screenshots depicted D.K. and M.S. After accompanying M.H. to her home, police then
informed M.H. that the videos appeared to show D.K. sexually abusing M.S. and M.H. gave consent to search her
home and take photographs. Police then searched the home, took photographs and spoke to M.S. They asked
M.H. to take M.S. and G.H. to the Children's Advocacy Center for interviews. During the interviews, M.S. denied
that she had any sexual contact with D.K. M.S. said "she was 'conflicted' and 'confused' by the allegations and
description of the video" and, after being asked whether "anyone had ever touched her, with or without her
consent," M.S. said that had not occurred. G. H., who was 12 at the time of the interview, "did not seem to know
anything about why" he was being interviewed. G.H. "denied that he had ever been touched inappropriately or
that his sister had ever confided in him that someone had hurt her." That same day, during a consensual search
of the family's home, police officers took several pictures of the living room which appeared to match details
shown in the videos. Although, pursuant to search warrants, the police obtained D.K.'s computers (both work
and home) and cameras, no evidence from those devices was offered at trial.

On Erie County's motion, the children were removed from M.H. and placed with their maternal grandparents
and a stay-away order was issued directing that D.K. have no contact with the children. By the time of the
dispositional hearing in November 2022, the children had been placed in a non-kinship foster home. During the
pendency of these proceedings, M.S. turned 18 and aged out of foster care; G.H., who is now 16, remains in foster
  We use cookies to improve the experience of our website. By continuing to use our
care.
  website, you consent to the use of cookies. To understand more about how we use         Accept & Continue
  cookies, please see our Privacy Policy.
At the hearing, neither M.H. nor D.K. testified, but M.H. joined D.K.'s objection to admitting the videos. M.S.
and G.H. each was separately represented by counsel. Neither child testified. Erie County's sole evidence of
abuse was the videos obtained from B.W. Erie County attempted to lay the foundation for the videos through the
testimony of Agent Baranski and Gary Mahoney, one of the state police officers who searched the home. Agent
Baranski testified as to how he came to find the videos and his delivery of the videos to the New York state police.
Investigator Mahoney testified that the living room he saw at the house "matched the living room in the video"
and noted that he observed cameras in the house and, in M.H. and D.K.'s bedroom, there were sex toys of the
kind depicted in the videos. He identified M.S. and D.K. in screenshots taken from the videos.

Based on Agent Baranski's chain of custody testimony, Investigator Mahoney's personal observations of the
location depicted in the video and M.H.'s identification of D.K. and M.S. in screenshots taken from the videos,
Family Court held that Erie County had laid a sufficient foundation to admit the videos. Crediting the "technical
experience and expertise" of Agent Baranski, Family Court held that his testimony indicated there were "no
signs" that the videos had been "manipulated or altered." In its order of fact-finding, Family Court gave "great
weight" to the videos in both proceedings and determined that both M.H. and D.K. had abused M.S. and, in
M.H.'s case, derivatively abused G.H.

By the time of the dispositional hearing, it was undisputed that M.H. had completed a parenting class, obtained
"suitable income and housing," and moved out of D.K.'s home into her own residence. At the hearing, the court
issued a stay-away order of protection against D.K. in favor of both children. Over the objection of M.H. and of
both children (who both asked to be returned to M.H.'s care), and five days before M.S.'s 18th birthday, Family
Court also ordered both children to be placed in foster care and that M.H. have only agency-supervised visits
with [*3]them. Upon turning 18 five days later, M.S. aged out of foster care and moved in with a family friend. A
later dispositional order set out the conditions with which M.H. had to comply to have her son returned to her
care.

On appeal, M.H. argued that (1) an insufficient foundation had been laid to admit the videos; (2) the finding of
abuse against her was not supported by a preponderance of the evidence; (3) the facts supporting the abuse
finding as to M.S. could not sustain a finding of derivative abuse against M.H. with respect to G.H.; and (4) the
dispositional order setting the conditions for G.H.'s return to her care was not in G.H.'s best interests.

The Appellate Division affirmed, with Presiding Justice Whalen in dissent (229 AD3d 1040 [4th Dept 2024]).
The court held that any uncertainty with respect to the videos went to the weight, not admissibility, of the
evidence (id. at 1042-1043). As to the abuse and derivative abuse findings, the court held that Family Court
could infer from the evidence "that the mother knew or should have known about the abuse and did nothing to
prevent it" (id. at 1043), and that the facts surrounding M.S.'s abuse "were 'so closely connected with the care of'
[G.H.] so as to justify the finding of derivative abuse" (id.). The court held there was record support for Family
Court's dispositional order as to G.H. (id. at 1044).

We granted leave to appeal.

                                                         II.

OnWe
   appeal
     use to our to
         cookiesCourt, M.H.the
                   improve   raises the fourof our
                               experience     issues identified
                                                   website. By by  the to
                                                                       dissent
                                                               continuing      below: (1) Family Court erred in
                                                                            use our
                      [FN1]
admitting
  website, the
            youvideos,       because
                consent to the use of they were
                                      cookies. Tonot properlymore about
                                                  understand  authenticated; (2) use
                                                                        how we   the finding of abuse&against
                                                                                             Accept   Continueher
  cookies,
was improperplease see our
                because, inPrivacy Policy
                            her view,     . knowledge is required to sustain a finding of abuse under Family
                                      actual
Court Act § 1012 (e) (iii) (A); (3) Family Court's finding of derivative abuse as to G.H. was improper because
there was no evidence that any sexual abuse was ever directed at G.H. and he did not meet the statutory
definition of an abused child; and (4) the dispositional order placing G.H. in foster care (and setting conditions
for his return to M.H.) was not in his best interests. Because we agree the videos were not properly
authenticated, and therefore should not have been received into evidence, we have no reason to reach the other
issues M.H. raises.

It is the burden of the party moving to introduce evidence to make "a sufficient threshold showing of reliability"
(People v Price, 29 NY3d 472, 482 [2017]). Reliability can be demonstrated "by proof that the offered evidence is
genuine and that there has been no tampering with it" (People v McGee, 49 NY2d 48, 59 [1979]). With respect to
video evidence, we held in Patterson that a video may be authenticated through (1) "testimony of a witness to the
recorded events or of an operator or installer or maintainer of the equipment that the videotape accurately
represents the subject matter depicted" or (2) testimony (expert or lay) establishing that the video "truly and
accurately represents what was before the camera" (People v Patterson, 93 NY2d 80, 84 [1999] [internal citation
omitted]). The authentication requirement applies to civil as well as criminal proceedings (see Zegarelli v
Hughes, 3 NY3d 64, 69 [2004] [applying Patterson standard for authentication of videotape in civil context]).
Proper authentication of evidence vindicates the basic principle that evidence which is not what the proponent
claims it to be can prove nothing at all (Price, 29 NY3d at 476 ["In order for a piece of evidence to be of probative
value, there must be proof that it is what its proponent says it is"], quoting United States v Sliker, 751 F2d 477,
497 [2d Cir 1984]).

A comparison to the facts in Patterson shows why the videos here were not properly authenticated. In Patterson,
the trial court admitted into evidence a surveillance video that purported to show a robbery inside a grocery
store (People v Patterson, 242 AD2d 740, 741 [2d Dept 1997], revd 93 NY2d 80 [1999]). Neither the parties who
witnessed the crime or the store owner (who had died from unrelated causes before trial) testified as to the
authenticity of the video (id.). The police obtained the video directly from the store owner just two weeks after
the crime and kept it secure in police custody, unaltered, until the trial (id.). The trial court held the video was
sufficiently authenticated by the testimony of officers who identified one of the defendants on the video and
confirmed that the video accurately depicted the "physical layout" of the store, which he had personally
photographed (id.). Even so, we held that the video was not properly authenticated because of a lack of
foundation and failure to provide a full chain of custody (Patterson, 93 NY2d at 85).

The foundation here is even more lacking than the one we held insufficient in Patterson. Whereas in Patterson,
the store owner "who himself inserted the videotape into the store surveillance system" provided the video
[*4]directly to the police (Patterson, 242 AD2d at 741), here the person who allegedly created the videos, D.K.,
provided no evidence or testimony, and B.W., the child pornographer with no connection to the family who
                                                                        [FN2]
claimed to have hacked into D.K.'s cameras, likewise never testified       . Instead, Agent Baranski offered
                                                [FN3]
hearsay testimony as to what B.W. had told him        . In Patterson, the "unaltered" feed of the footage from the
grocery store was provided by the store owner (242 AD2d at 741). Here, there was no continuous video, only
snippets excerpted from a longer, unrecovered feed of the camera by B.W., who told Agent Baranski he had
watched many days of video but did not explain what or how he selected and what he omitted or deleted. Agent
Baranski did not testify that B.W. told him the videos were unaltered. The store owner in Patterson was a
  We use cookies
businessperson    to improve
               with           the experience
                      no apparent            of our website.
                                   ulterior motives          By continuing
                                                     (id.). B.W.,          to use
                                                                  in contrast,     ourcriminal prosecution at the time
                                                                               faced
  website, you consent to the use of cookies. To understand more about how we use             Accept & Continue
he provided the information leading to the discovery of the videos here, and had created the versions of the
  cookies, please see our Privacy Policy.                                        [FN4]
videos he delivered to the police by extracting them from a larger video or feed       . Finally, the video in
Patterson was obtained by the police two weeks after the crime (Patterson, 242 AD2d at 741); here, there was a
roughly two-and-a-half-year period between when the videos were stolen and snipped by the child pornographer
and when they were recovered by the FBI. This long gap in the chain of custody of a key piece of evidence—65
times as long as the gap in Patterson—raises further doubts about the authenticity of the videos.

Our dissenting colleagues misinterpret the significance of our observations about B.W.'s motivations and
technical abilities. Those points are made to show the weakness of the authentication evidence proffered here
when compared to Patterson, not to make any conclusion about whether the videos here are altered or not. One
dissent describes the possibility that the videos in question were fabricated as "ridiculous" and "outlandish"
(Troutman, J., dissenting op at 8), but the possibility that the shopkeeper in Patterson could have altered the
videotape in question in the two weeks before delivering it to the police is even more remote. Regardless, the
likelihood of the alteration is beside the point. The question at issue is whether the proponent of the evidence
has done enough to establish its reliability. Here, the confluence of factors—including the bizarre circumstances
surrounding the discovery of the videos and the long time period between their creation and their recovery—
raise doubts about their authenticity, and the agency simply failed to carry its burden to dispel those doubts.

Even if were we to bypass the authentication rules and ask, instead, the irrelevant and abstract question whether
phony videos could be created by 2022, when the videos here were obtained by law enforcement, the technology
                                                                 [FN5]
to make realistic manipulated videos was widely available then         . Even on its own terms, one dissent
[*5]concedes that as of 2022, when law enforcement first took possession of the videos in this case, technological
innovations "enabled users to convincingly alter or substitute the appearance of people in videos of actual
events" (Singas, J., dissenting op at 4 [emphasis omitted]).

The facts relied on by Family Court do not alleviate the reliability concerns raised by the unusual origin and
uncertain chain of custody of these videos. First, Family Court credited the expertise and testimony of Agent
Baranski in determining the videos were not altered. Agent Baranski was concededly familiar with child
pornography through his experience, but the County never sought to qualify him as an expert (or establish his
experience) in video authentication, which is the point. Broad familiarity with a subject does not make someone
                                                             [FN6]
learned in detecting evidence of tampering or fabrication       . Yet Agent Baranski did not testify as to any
training or experience in identifying signs of tampering or video alteration that could establish his ability to
authenticate as a lay witness. He was not asked whether he examined the videos to look for tampering; whether
he used any forensic tool to detect tampering; or even whether he was able to offer a learned affirmative opinion
that the video was not tampered with, as Patterson mandates. Instead, the question he was asked about
tampering was: "[D]id you make any observations that led

you to believe that the video footage had been tampered with or altered in any way?" to which he answered, "No"
without elaboration. Agent Baranski himself may have possessed the experience or training necessary to
authenticate the videos, but we will never know because he was not asked the important foundational questions.

Investigator Mahoney's testimony that the videos matched his personal observations of the layout of the living
room and items he observed there are similarly insufficient and are not meaningfully different from what we
rejected in Patterson. There, an officer who had visited the store where the robbery occurred testified that the
                                                                                                      [FN7]
video was an accurate depiction of the store's "actual physical layout" (Patterson, 242 AD2d at 741)        . The
  We use cookies to improve the experience of our website. By continuing to use our
fact that much
   website,     of the video
            you consent  to theapparently   accurately
                                 use of cookies.       depictedmore
                                                 To understand  the home
                                                                     aboutis notwe
                                                                           how   sufficient—as
                                                                                   use         itAccept
                                                                                                  was not  in Patterson
                                                                                                        & Continue
—to  authenticate
   cookies, please the
                   see video.   If such
                       our Privacy      testimony
                                      Policy .     was insufficient then, the increasing prevalence of "deepfake"
videos has only rendered the method of matching circumstantial details in a video to personal observations a
more suspect form of authentication; most fabricated videos "leverage" real details from real photos and videos
of real places and people, then alter the pieces the person wishes to alter to create a realistic, but manipulated,
video (see Amicus Br. of Center for Integrity in Forensic Sciences at 7-8). In the authentication context, what
matters most is whether the events depicted are as real as the proponent claims them to be, not whether there
are some identifying features of

the video that can be corroborated in real life. Contrary to the dissents' characterization (Troutman, J.,
dissenting op at 5-6; Singas, J., dissenting op at 6-8), that the circumstantial evidence offered here is insufficient
does not mean that circumstantial evidence is never relevant to authentication. We see nothing "shortsighted"
(Troutman, J., dissenting op at 10) or "troubling" (Singas, J., dissenting op at 12) in continuing to rely on
Patterson's proven framework in light of changing technological circumstances (Patterson, 93 NY2d at 84 ["the
obligation and need for responsible accuracy and careful reliability should not be sacrificed to some of the whims
and weaknesses of fast moving and rapidly changing technology"]). Without saying so, our dissenting colleagues
would like to overrule Patterson. No party has asked us to do so, and Patterson is particularly prescient in the
factors it identified as insufficient to establish the authenticity of a video, especially given the far greater ability
to manipulate video images now as compared to 1999, when we decided Patterson.

Erie County's reliance on People v Goldman (35 NY3d 582 [2020]) is entirely misplaced. In Goldman, we
affirmed a trial court's authentication of a video posted on YouTube. The defendant, charged with a drive-by
gang-related homicide, objected to authentication of a rap video (appearing to show him boasting about the
crime) solely on the ground that the People could not prove when it was made (id. at 588). The cooperating
witness, a friend of the defendant who was the driver of the car during the shooting, testified that the evening
after the shooting, the defendant invited him to come to the filming of a rap video the next morning and told him
what the name of the video would be (which corresponded to its name on YouTube) (id.). The cooperating
witness also testified that he viewed the video on YouTube, shortly after defendant posted it, identified in the
video the defendant and the two rear-seat passengers, who were well-known to him; and identified the social
media handle used by defendant and his crew, which appeared on the video (id.). He further testified that the
video introduced in court accurately represented the video he had previously watched on YouTube (id.). Those
facts provided a far more robust basis for authentication than is present here.

The rules of evidence apply in Family Court just as much as they apply in any other court. The proponent of
                                                             [FN8]
evidence bears the burden of demonstrating its authenticity        . Patterson is on all fours with this case and, as
explained herein, the evidence establishing the authenticity of the store video in Patterson was stronger than
that present here, yet we held that the store video was not properly authenticated. The failure to authenticate
evidence sufficiently does not mean the evidence was false, but only that it was not properly authenticated
according to the rules of evidence. Our dissenting colleagues' abundant use of colorful adjectives and adverbs
neither establishes the authenticity of this evidence nor persuades as to the occurrence of the predicted
catastrophes. We do not mean to suggest that the videos here could not have been authenticated, or that child
victims must testify, or that B.W., Agent Baranski, or some other person could not have offered adequate
authentication testimony. But the evidence of authentication proffered here was legally insufficient. What that
means for the next case is that in Family Court, as in all our courts, evidence must be properly authenticated.
  We use cookies to improve the experience of our website. By continuing to use our
                                                         ***more about how we use
  website, you consent to the use of cookies. To understand                                     Accept & Continue
  cookies, please see our Privacy Policy.
Accordingly, the orders of the Appellate Division should be reversed, without costs, and the petitions dismissed.



TROUTMAN, J. (dissenting):

The majority holds that videos depicting the mother's live-in boyfriend sexually abusing her 14-year-old
daughter were not properly authenticated, and therefore should not have been admitted into evidence by Family
                                                                              [FN1]
Court. The majority expresses concern about the rise of "deepfake" videos       . Yet no one uttered the word
"deepfake" during the Family Court proceedings below, nor was there any evidence presented that the portions
of the videos depicting sexual abuse were fabricated. In addressing a concern that was never raised below, the
majority creates new and perhaps insurmountable hurdles for future authentication of video evidence. As a
result, children will be harmed and abusers will escape accountability. I dissent.

                                                           I.

The majority's recitation of the facts is incomplete. It is true that while being interviewed at the Child Advocacy
Center, the daughter denied that she had been sexually abused by the mother's boyfriend. But Family Court did
not find those denials convincing, and explained why:

"The digital recording of the interview was moved into evidence as Respondents' Exhibit A and viewed by the
Court. Respondents' counsel argue that the video shows the child denying any sexual abuse at least eight
different times during the video. While it is certain that the child made no disclosures during the video, it is not
persuasive evidence that the child was not abused. [The daughter] cried throughout the video and sat in silence
for uncomfortable periods of time after questions were asked. When she did respond, she provided whispered,
one-word answers. She stated that she was 'conflicted' and 'confused' by the allegations and description of the
video. She described her relationship with her mother as 'distant' and said that she has a better relationship with
[the mother's boyfriend], whom she calls 'dad.' At the end of the interview, [the daughter] was asked a series of
questions about whether anyone had ever touched her, with or without her consent. [The daughter] did not
make a clear and convincing denial. Instead, she uttered a whispered 'no,' given through tears. She did not
present as a happy, confident young woman of seventeen, but rather as a much younger child who was defeated
and frightened. Nothing about this interview supported the argument that [the daughter] honestly denied being
abused. On the contrary, she presented as an abused child who was afraid to speak honestly."

This Court has repeatedly recognized the validity of Child Sexual Abuse Accommodation Syndrome (CSAAS),
which explains that children who have been sexually abused might not only delay disclosure; they may also deny
that they were sexually abused at all (see People v Nicholson, 26 NY3d 813, 828 [2016], citing People v Spicola,
16 NY3d 441, 453-454 [2011]).

The majority further states that during a search of the family's home, "police officers took several pictures of the
living room which appeared to match details shown in the videos" (majority op at 3). That description belies the
level of detail regarding the home that was confirmed by police to match what was depicted in the videos. As
Family Court explained:

"[I]t is clear that the room shown in the video is the same room photographed by [the investigator] during his
  We use cookies to improve the experience of our website. By continuing to use our
investigation
  website, youofconsent
                 [the boyfriend's] home.
                        to the use of      TheTo
                                      cookies. same  couch, painting,
                                                 understand more aboutafghan,
                                                                        how weend
                                                                                usetable and lamp
                                                                                              Accept are all visible.
                                                                                                      & Continue
Photographs   taken
  cookies, please    during
                   see       the execution
                       our Privacy Policy. of a search warrant further establish the reliability of the video. These
[*6]photographs . . . show objects recovered in the home. Those objects can also been seen in the video.
Specifically, [one photograph] shows the foot massager/scraper that [the daughter] was using on [the
boyfriend's] feet in the video. [Another photo] shows the vibrators and dildos recovered from the drawer in the
bedroom shared by the Respondents. And in [other photos], [the daughter's] room is decorated with the same
type of stuffed animal she was holding in the video in which [the boyfriend sexually abused her]."

These factual findings were affirmed by the Appellate Division (229 AD3d 1040, 1042-1043 [4th Dept 2024]).

Finally, the majority states that the mother joined the boyfriend's objection to admission of the videos (majority
op at 4). The specific objection made by the boyfriend's counsel was that given the period of time between when
the videos were recorded and when they were recovered by the FBI, the chain of custody was lacking, and that
the Department of Social Services (DSS) would be unable to show "that it wasn't altered unreasonably in any
way." The mother's counsel agreed with that objection and stated that the video may have been "heavily altered."
No one used the word "deepfake," or argued that the videos accurately depicted the family's home and the
individuals who lived there (which the mother now does not dispute) but that the portions of the videos showing
sexual abuse were fabricated, which is the mother's current position.

                                                          II.

Generally, video evidence "may be authenticated by the testimony of a witness to the recorded events or of an
operator or installer or maintainer of the equipment that the videotape accurately represents the subject matter
depicted" (People v Patterson, 93 NY2d 80, 84 [1999]). "Testimony, expert or otherwise, may also establish that
a videotape truly and accurately represents what was before the camera" (id. [internal quotation marks
omitted]). " 'Any person having requisite knowledge of the facts' " may provide the necessary foundation for
authentication (People v Rodriguez, 38 NY3d 151, 155 [2022], quoting People v Price, 29 NY3d 472, 477 [2017]).
"The decision to admit or exclude videotape evidence generally rests . . . within a trial court's founded
discretion," and the trial court's ruling "may disturbed by this Court only when no legal foundation has been
proffered or when an abuse of discretion as a matter of law is demonstrated" (Patterson, 93 NY2d at 84).

Circumstantial evidence is also a permissible method of authentication. In Patterson, we recognized that
"reasonable inferential linkages can ordinarily supply foundational prerequisites" (id. at 85). And in People v
Goldman (35 NY3d 582 [2020]), we held that "distinctive identifying characteristics" in the video at issue there
demonstrated that the video "accurately represented the subject matter depicted" (id. at 595 [internal quotation
marks and alteration omitted]). The Guide to New York Evidence published on the New York Courts website
recognizes circumstantial evidence as a permissible method of authentication, observing that the "appearance,
contents, substance, internal patterns, or other distinctive characteristics of the item, taken together with all the
circumstances," may be sufficient for authentication (see Guide to NY Evid rule 9.05 [6], Methods of
Authentication and Identification, https://nycourts.gov/judges/evidence/9-
AUTHENTICITY/9.05_METHODS.pdf [last accessed Feb. 6, 2026]).

Here, circumstantial evidence amply demonstrates that the videos accurately represented the subject matter
depicted, such that Family Court did not abuse its discretion in admitting them. First, the mother affirmatively
identified her boyfriend and her daughter from screenshots taken from the videos. Second, video cameras that
theWe  use cookies
    police found intothe
                      improve
                         livingthe experience
                                room          of our website.
                                      were in position        By continuing
                                                       to capture           to abuse
                                                                   the sexual  use ouras depicted in the videos. Third,
   website, you consent to the use of cookies. To understand more about how we use              Accept & Continue
the living room's appearance and furnishings were as they appeared in the video upon a search of the home. And
  cookies, please see our Privacy Policy.
finally, items indistinguishable from those shown in the videos during the instances of sexual abuse were found
in the home.

This circumstantial evidence was sufficient for Family Court to conclude that a sufficient foundation was laid to
authenticate the videos and admit them into evidence. Although the majority relies heavily upon the length of
time that passed between when the videos were recorded and when they were recovered by the FBI, that factor
goes to weight, not admissibility, given that FBI Agent Baranski adequately explained the circumstances leading
to the recovery of the videos.

In addition to the circumstantial evidence of authenticity, DSS presented the testimony of Agent Baranksi, who
testified about the circumstances leading to the recovery of the videos from B.W. Baranski further testified that
that he did not observe anything in the videos that led him to believe that they had been tampered with or
altered. Baranski worked exclusively on crimes against children, primarily investigated child pornography and
human [*7]trafficking, and "perform[ed] digital forensic work and online undercover work." Baranski's
testimony that the videos were not altered implicitly relied upon his training and experience.

Patterson does not require a different result. Patterson was reversed on other grounds regarding the admission
of a police officer's testimony regarding the victim's earlier lineup identification of the defendant (see 93 NY2d at
82). The Court merely noted, that because further proceedings would occur, "the present state of the record
provides an inadequate basis for admissibility" of the surveillance video (id. at 85). Furthermore, the Appellate
Division decision noted that a police officer had confirmed that the surveillance video "accurately depicted the
actual physical layout of the grocery store" (see People v Patterson, 242 AD2d 740, 741 [2d Dept 1997], revd 93
NY2d 80).

Patterson is readily distinguishable, because here, the evidence that the videos accurately depicted events
occurring in the family's home was far more robust than merely corroboration of the home's "physical layout."
There is no dispute on appeal that the innocuous portions of the videos accurately depicted the members of the
family and their home, as confirmed by the mother's identifications, the nearly identical appearance of the living
room when the police searched it, and cameras placed at the angle that would have captured the sexual abuse.
Furthermore, as explained, similar items to those seen in the videos during the portions depicting the boyfriend
sexually abusing the daughter were also found in the home. The majority claims to be puzzled by my comparison
of the stronger evidence of authentication presented here than that presented in Patterson (majority op at 12 n
7), yet nowhere in its opinion does it purport to contend with these differences.

In sum, the circumstantial evidence of authenticity, coupled with Agent Baranski's testimony, was sufficient for
Family Court to conclude that the videos were admissible. The remaining issues raised by the mother were
relevant to the weight afforded to the videos, not their admissibility. Neither the mother nor the boyfriend
testified during the proceedings that the videos were not accurate.

                                                          III.

The majority's and the mother's theory that the videos could have been "deepfakes," although not explained in
any detail, appears to be as follows: B.W. did in fact hack into the family's living room camera and viewed the
individuals
  We        who to
      use cookieslived in the the
                     improve   home  interacting
                                   experience     with
                                               of our  each other
                                                      website. By and   goingto use
                                                                  continuing   aboutour
                                                                                     their days, but he then used that
accumulated
  website, youvideo footage
                consent to theand some
                               use of   unspecified
                                      cookies.        softwaremore
                                               To understand    program
                                                                    aboutohowfabricate
                                                                                we usethe portions of he
                                                                                                Accept & video
                                                                                                          Continue
  cookies,the
depicting  please  see our
              mother's     Privacy Policy
                        boyfriend         . abusing the daughter. And he fabricated those portions of the videos
                                    sexually
depicting sexual abuse but made sure to include in those fabrications inanimate objects that were later found in
the family's home. This outlandish theory was never raised by the mother or her boyfriend before Family Court.
The mother raised this ridiculous proposition for the first time on appeal.

Moreover, the majority's speculation that the videos might have been deepfakes relies upon suppositions and
inferences that were never presented to Family Court. For example, the majority states that B.W.'s "ability to
hack into computers and cameras of far-away people, with whom he had no connection, suggests he possessed
the technical savvy to manipulate video images" (majority op at 9 n 4). No evidence was presented of B.W.'s
technical expertise, nor was any evidence presented regarding the software programs for creating deepfakes that
were available in 2019 (see majority op at 10 n 5).

In addition, the majority asserts that "[t]raders of child pornography splice and edit videos to enhance their
appeal," based on assertions made in an amicus brief (see majority op at 9 n 4). No evidence was presented to
Family Court regarding the behavior of those who trade in child pornography, nor was any evidence whatsoever
presented that B.W. traded these videos or edited them in any way beyond simply saving certain portions of
them to his computer, as Agent Baranski testified.

The majority states that "the increasing prevalence of 'deepfake' videos has only rendered the method of
matching circumstantial details in a video to personal observations a more suspect form of authentication"
(majority op at 12). It seems that in the future, a party opposing the introduction of video evidence need only
posit, with no evidentiary support whatsoever, that the video might be a deepfake. The party introducing the
video then must disprove that unfounded accusation. How is the party seeking admission to do so, if
circumstantial evidence is not a permissible method of authentication?

The majority rightfully does not suggest that the daughter should have been required to view the video of her
sexual abuse and testify that it accurately depicted the horrors she suffered. Imposing such trauma upon a
survivor of child sexual abuse by revictimizing them cannot be a necessary method of authentication, and Family
Court Act § 1046 (a) (vi) specifies that children are not required to testify in such proceedings. The majority
notes, however, that the boyfriend, who created the videos, did not testify to authenticate them (majority op at
8). It is hardly surprising [*8]that DSS could not authenticate videos of child sexual abuse through the
perpetrator of that abuse, who would be admitting to various felonies by testimony that the videos were accurate.

That leaves, ostensibly, expert testimony. According to the majority, Agent Baranski's testimony did not suffice.
For the reasons explained, I disagree. But the majority's conclusion is problematic for other reasons that will
have ramifications far beyond this particular case. Given that the speculation that the videos were deepfakes was
raised for the first time on appeal, there is nothing in the record to suggest that DSS will be able to find, secure,
and compensate an expert in identifying deepfake videos in the future. Do such experts exist? Are there
sufficient numbers of them such that they will be available to testify in every criminal or Family Court
                                                                                                         [FN2]
proceeding where video evidence of child abuse is offered and the perpetrator contends it is a deepfake?
The majority does not say, and lower courts and those tasked with protecting children from abuse will be left to
                                                          [FN3]
sort through the havoc the majority's opinion will wreak.

The majority's decision unfortunately will make it exponentially more difficult not only to authenticate video
  We usebut
evidence  cookies  to protect
              also to improve victims
                              the experience
                                      of childofabuse
                                                 our website.
                                                      and holdByperpetrators
                                                                 continuing toaccountable.
                                                                               use our     This decision is
  website, you consent to the use of cookies. To understand more about how we use             Accept & Continue
shortsighted.
  cookies, please see our Privacy Policy.
SINGAS, J. (dissenting):

I fully agree with Judge Troutman's dissent. I am compelled to write separately to emphasize that the majority's
superficial and simplistic analysis of "deepfake" technology raises serious legal questions to which the majority
supplies no answer, and defies the critical approach taken by the federal courts and other jurisdictions. More
importantly here, it will harm abused and neglected children. I cannot countenance this result.

Make no mistake: in a Family Court child-protective proceeding, the majority rejects the sole evidence of the
boyfriend's serial sexual abuse of the mother's 14-year-old daughter due to its concern about deepfakes and
similar forgery, absent any meaningful connection whatsoever between such technology and the facts of this
case.

The majority contorts the record. It misleadingly describes the videos at issue as "appear[ing] to show" the
boyfriend committing sexual abuse (see majority op at 3). In reality, after viewing the videos, Family Court found
that they depict the boyfriend "touch[ing] and kiss[ing]" the daughter "in a sexual manner," "kiss[ing] her neck
and fondl[ing] her breasts," and "us[ing] an inanimate object and his fingers to penetrate her vaginally." The
majority's claim that the daughter "denied" being abused (majority op at 3) is equally dishonest by omission (see
Troutman, J., dissenting op at 2-3 [revealing what the record actually reflects]). Nor does the majority
acknowledge that the mother denied the boyfriend's sexual abuse despite refusing to even watch these videos, or
that the mother never argued the videos are fake. Indeed, the mother declined to testify at all, despite being
warned that Family Court would draw the strongest permissible adverse inference against her if she chose to
remain silent.

It is vital to understand what the majority nonetheless posits may have occurred here. The majority proposes
that in or before January 2022, B.W., a voyeur child pornographer, after hacking into this family's living-room
security camera and gathering innocuous footage of the boyfriend, mother, daughter, and son, (1) somehow also
gathered innocuous footage of specific sex toys owned by the boyfriend, which police found stored in the
boyfriend's fingerprint-locked bedroom (where there were no cameras); (2) manipulated the innocuous footage
to conjure multiple, wholly forged videos of the boyfriend repeatedly vaginally penetrating the daughter in the
living room, with hyper-realistic depictions of the boyfriend and daughter's faces and bodies; (3) in doing so,
fabricated the boyfriend penetrating the daughter with the exact sex toys later found in the boyfriend's personal
possession; (4) also added hyper-realistic audio to the fabricated videos, including conversations between the
boyfriend and the daughter speaking in their actual voices, and the daughter loudly crying out while being
sexually abused; and (5) during one such conversation, had the daughter rub her arm, and the boyfriend respond
by asking if that was where the daughter "got her shot"—during a video that, petitioner later proved, was date-
stamped shortly after the daughter, in actual fact, received two vaccinations at a doctor's office. According to the
majority, B.W. would have done all this so convincingly that, upon watching the videos, an FBI agent specializing
in child pornography, Family Court, and two Appellate Division panels saw no indication that any portion of the
videos was altered, let alone fabricated wholesale (see 229 AD3d 1040, 1043 [4th Dept 2024] ["(Family Court)
determined that the 'actions, dialog( ), and behavior shown in the videos show no indication of any tampering'
"]; Matter of G.H. (D.K.), 229 AD3d 1048, 1051 [4th Dept 2024] [stating, in the boyfriend's separate appeal in
these proceedings, that "(the boyfriend), the mother, and the children were all easily identifiable in the videos,
and
  Weweuse
        agree withto
           cookies (Family  Court's)
                     improve the     determination
                                 experience   of our that theBy
                                                    website.  'actions, dialog,
                                                                continuing      and
                                                                           to use   behavior shown in the videos
                                                                                  our
show  no you
         indication
  website,          of to
               consent anythe use
                           tampering.'  ThereTowere no
                                  of cookies.           visible
                                                  understand    cuts
                                                             more    or edits,
                                                                   about how or  jumps in the time
                                                                               we use              stamps
                                                                                              Accept &     on the
                                                                                                       Continue
  cookies, please see our Privacy Policy.
videos"]).
The majority fails to account for the fundamental question of whether, at the time relevant to this case, video-
faking technology was even capable of the wholesale fabrication that the majority imagines. The majority instead
misdirects by waving this question away (see majority op at 10 & n 5). But to restate the majority's position is to
dismantle it. Given the significance that the majority attaches to its conclusion that petitioner insufficiently
disproved the possibility these videos were forged (see majority op at 8-13 & nn 4-7), how could the fact that
such forgery was impossible be "abstract" and "not germane" to the majority's analysis (majority op at 10 & n 5)?

To be clear, the level of fakery required here was not possible, let alone readily available, when these events were
captured on video in 2019 or recovered by police in 2022 (see generally e.g. Thanh Thi Nguyen et al., Deep
[*9]learning for deepfakes creation and detection: A survey, 223 Comput Vision & Image Understanding, art
103525 [Oct. 2022] [as of 2022, deepfake video technology merely enabled users to convincingly alter or
substitute the appearance of people in videos of actual events]; Yisroel Mirsky & Wenke Lee, The Creation and
Detection of Deepfakes: A Survey, 54 ACM Computing Surveys, art 7 [No. 1, Dec. 2020] [same, as of 2020]).
Insofar as such videos could be generated at all at the relevant time, the videos at issue here certainly could not
be falsified convincingly (see generally e.g. Nuha Aldausari et al., Video Generative Adversarial Networks: A
Review, 55 ACM Computing Surveys, art 30 [No. 2, Jan. 2022] [as of 2022, "(t)he current state of the art for
(deepfake videos) suffers from low quality frames or low number of frames or both"]; Jonathan Ho et al., Video
Diffusion Models, NIPS'22: Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems 8633-8646 [2022] [as of 2022, state-of-the-art deepfake video technology could generate videos not
exceeding 128x128-pixel resolution]; see United States v Schram, 128 F4th 922, 926 [8th Cir 2025], quoting
David Thiel et al., Generative ML and CSAM: Implications and Mitigations 2 [2023] [as of 2023, even "highly
photorealistic" deepfake child pornography—a category that comprised "less than one percent of child sexual
abuse material" in circulation—"could still be 'visually distinguished as being (computer) generated' "]). I invite
the reader to research the state of the technology in and before 2022, including by reading the three
nontechnical lay articles cited by the majority, which only further support my position (see majority op at 10 n
5), and to reach their own informed conclusion.

The majority is therefore deeply out of touch. Deepfake and other emerging technologies raise thorny evidentiary
challenges that our courts will need to grapple with, thoughtfully and with nuance, in cases where they are
actually presented. The majority's naïve analysis—essentially, saying the word "deepfake," throwing up its hands
                                                                                                        [FN1]
without critical thought, and returning an abused child to an abuser's care—cannot be the way forward.

This marks only the beginning of the majority's parade of legal and factual errors. After accepting the impossible
premise of fakery, the majority substantively ignores the most powerful indicia of the videos' reliability: the
compelling circumstantial evidence of authenticity that petitioner put forth, much of which Judge Troutman's
dissent describes (see Troutman, J., dissenting op at 3-4). Above all, the Appellate Division affirmed Family
Court's factual finding that the very instrumentalities of the sexual abuse seen on the videos were recovered by
police from the boyfriend's locked bedroom inside the home, which did not have a camera in it (see 229 AD3d at
1043). Even assuming, as the majority does, that B.W. somehow saw the boyfriend's specific sex toys in innocent
use while accessing the family's living-room camera feed, why would B.W., when later generating videos of
fabricated sexual abuse involving total strangers, depict that abuse being committed with specific objects in the
boyfriend's personal possession? More to the point, why must the videos' proponent disprove that made-up
   We use cookies
proposition        to improve the
             as a precondition  toexperience  of our
                                   the threshold     website.
                                                  step        By continuing
                                                       of admitting         to use
                                                                    the videos     ourevidence in the hearing court's
                                                                                into
   website, you consent to the use of cookies. To understand more about how we use              Accept & Continue
discretion—after which the mother could then challenge the videos' evidentiary weight? After all, parties argue
   cookies, please see our Privacy Policy.
all the time that evidentiary exhibits are not what they purport to be. The majority's novel burden flips the
authentication standard on its head, requiring the proponent to disprove unsupported theories of fakery as a
prerequisite to mere admissibility.

The circumstantial evidence substantively ignored by the majority does not end there. As revealed by FBI Agent
Baranski's testimony, it was the police, not B.W., who ultimately identified the boyfriend, mother, and children
as the people seen on the videos. The police made these identifications based on their extensive investigatory
work, including an apparent IP address and an email address associated with the security camera's owner that,
police discovered, comprised the boyfriend's first initial and last name and the name of his employer. And, as the
majority again fails to acknowledge, petitioner also established an unbroken chain of custody from when the
videos were recovered, and "gaps in the chain of custody may be excused when circumstances provide
reasonable assurances of the identity and unchanged condition of the evidence. Such gaps go to the weight of the
evidence, not its admissibility" (People v Baez, 42 NY3d 124, 128 [2024] [alterations omitted], quoting People v
Hawkins, 11 NY3d 484, 494 [2008]). That too is precisely the case here.

These facts, all the more in combination, render People v Patterson (93 NY2d 80 [1999]) fundamentally
inapposite (see Troutman, J., dissenting op at 6-7), notwithstanding the majority's superficial comparison to that
case. Certainly, the circumstantial evidence here, especially the evidence involving the specific instrumentalities
of the boyfriend's serial abuse, was absent in Patterson and is more than sufficient to refute the majority's bald
speculation that these videos depict fictional events. The majority also ignores our observation in Patterson itself
that "reasonable [*10]inferential linkages can ordinarily supply foundational prerequisites" for evidentiary
authentication (93 NY2d at 85). So too, in conclusory fashion, the majority purports to distinguish People v
Goldman (35 NY3d 582 [2020]) after merely reciting its facts (see majority op at 13-14). The majority never
actually explains its nonsensical assertion that the markedly weaker circumstantial evidence in Goldman—which
this Court deemed adequate for authentication in a criminal case (see 35 NY3d at 595-596)—was somehow more
probative than the highly compelling constellation of circumstantial evidence before Family Court here.

Given the majority's conclusion, it is hard to imagine what circumstantial evidence could ever suffice to
authenticate a video. The majority papers over this important question by tersely claiming that circumstantial
evidence may be "relevant to authentication," yet it fails to explain why this circumstantial evidence was
insufficient or what other forms of circumstantial evidence could possibly suffice (see majority op at 13). If, as it
appears, the majority is effectively holding that circumstantial evidence can never be enough, the majority is
unaccountably sweeping aside well settled law recognizing circumstantial evidence as a valid method of
authentication (see Troutman, J., dissenting op at 5-6).

The majority is not just wrong on the facts and on the law. Its errors will harm child victims. The majority claims
not to be requiring "that child victims must testify" in cases like this one (majority op at 14), but that is the
predictable effect of its misguided approach. Surely, a child abuser will not testify to the accuracy of a video
showing them committing sexual abuse. Nor will a voyeur who happens upon, watches, and saves such child
pornography, as B.W. allegedly did here, admit on the witness stand to committing those crimes. Without a
cooperation agreement, no competent attorney would allow their client to give such testimony. Unlike the
majority, I reject the proposition that Family Court's ability to protect abused children should hinge upon
abusers and child pornographers agreeing to cooperate in child-protective proceedings (see majority op at 9 n 3).
  We use cookies to improve the experience of our website. By continuing to use our
Recognizing  that
  website, you    such testimony
               consent            was
                       to the use of   never To
                                     cookies. going to happen,
                                                 understand    petitioner
                                                            more about howalso
                                                                            weproperly
                                                                               use     relied, in part,
                                                                                            Accept      on
                                                                                                   & Continue
Baranski's testimony
  cookies, please see as
                      ouran FBI Special
                          Privacy Policy.Agent who "primarily investigate[s] child pornography related matters"
and "perform[s] digital forensic work." Agent Baranski's testimony makes plain that he is indeed a child-
pornography expert, not a mere layperson, but that is how the majority treats him in discounting his testimony
as a matter of law (see majority op at 8-9, 11-12). And the majority's further assertion that Agent Baranski
somehow never opined on the videos' authenticity is incoherent. The majority itself acknowledges Baranski's
testimony detailing the circumstances whereby the FBI obtained the videos, and his testimony that he saw
nothing "that led [him] to believe that the video footage had been tampered with or altered in any way" (majority
op at 12). Yet in the next breath, the majority claims that Agent Baranski did not testify to "whether he examined
the videos to look for tampering" or whether he could "offer a learned affirmative opinion that the video was not
tampered with" (majority op at 11). The majority's own quotation of his testimony refutes its self-serving
account. To state the obvious, it is unsurprising that Agent Baranski did not expressly testify to the absence of
wholesale forgery in these videos (see majority op at 12), because—to reiterate—the technology that the majority
fears did not then exist. Again, Agent Baranski's testimony was surely enough to support Family Court's
discretionary determination that the videos were adequately authenticated.

With circumstantial evidence of the videos' authenticity and testimony by a child-pornography expert out of the
picture, all that remains is testimony by the child victim of the abuse. As Judge Troutman explains (see
Troutman, J., dissenting op at 9), we cannot—must not—force the choice of either revictimizing child victims by
requiring them to testify, or returning these victims to their abusers' care. Tragically, the majority fails to see that
its holding will impose this profound harm.

The majority also fails to apprehend the broader consequences of its ruling. Taken to its logical conclusion, the
majority's holding radically alters the authentication landscape, with unknown effects of which the majority
appears entirely unaware. Precisely what type of expert testimony would the majority now require whenever a
litigant cries "deepfake," regardless of whether that incantation has any evidentiary support? The majority's
novel requirement of such testimony to rebut even this patently baseless deepfake defense—which must be given
by "an expert . . . in video authentication" (majority op at 11)—is unreasoned, in no way supported by Patterson
(contra majority op at 14), and cannot be squared with black letter law recognizing other valid methods of
evidentiary authentication.

The majority's holding also marks a significant departure from other jurisdictions' thoughtful approach. The
federal Advisory Committee on Evidence Rules (Advisory Committee), for one, has prepared a working draft of a
[*11]new Federal Rule of Evidence 901 (c) addressing authentication and deepfakes, requiring the exhibit's
opponent to put forth evidence sufficient to find that such forgery occurred:

"(c) Potentially Fabricated Evidence Created by Artificial Intelligence.

"(1) Showing Required Before an Inquiry into Fabrication. A party challenging the authenticity of an item of
evidence on the ground that it has been fabricated, in whole or in part, by generative artificial intelligence must
present evidence sufficient to support a finding of such fabrication to warrant an inquiry by the court.

"(2) Showing Required by the Proponent. If the opponent meets the requirement of (1), the item of evidence will
be admissible only if the proponent demonstrates to the court that it is more likely than not authentic" (Advisory
Committee on Evidence Rules, Agenda Book 167 [Nov. 5, 2025], available at
  We use cookies to improve the experience of our website. By continuing to use our
https://www.uscourts.gov/sites/default/files/document/2025-
  website, you consent to the use of cookies. To understand more about how we use             Accept & Continue
11_evidence_rules_commitee_agenda_book_final.pdf).
  cookies, please see our Privacy Policy.
The draft rule thus "sets out a two-step process for regulating claims of deepfakes" under which "the opponent
must set forth enough information for a reasonable person to find that the item has been fabricated in whole or
part by the use of generative artificial intelligence" (id. at 168 [draft Committee Note accompanying the rule]).
This eminently logical proposal recognizes that "a broad claim of 'deepfake' is not enough to put the court and
the proponent to the time and expense of showing that the item has not been manipulated" (id.; see also id.
[admonishing that a deepfake "argument that is made without foundation in the evidence" "is subject to the
court's inherent authority"]). Sister states and federal courts have likewise held, deepfake technology
notwithstanding, that an exhibit's proponent "need not rule out all possibilities that are inconsistent with
authenticity, or prove beyond any doubt that the evidence is what it purports to be" (Mooney v State, 487 Md
701, 734-735, 321 A3d 91, 111 [2024] [brackets omitted] [specifically discussing deepfakes]; see e.g. Schram, 128
F4th at 926 ["(T)he government need not produce evidence to negate a speculative assertion that a child in an
image is virtual. . . . On the nearly empty record here, (the defendant's) concern that images shown to the jury
depicted virtual children is just speculation unsupported by any concrete facts"]; People v Gonzales, 2019 COA
30, ¶ 29, 474 P3d 124, 130 [Colo App 2019] ["the fact that the falsification of electronic recordings is always
possible does not, in our view, justify restrictive rules of authentication that must be applied in every case when
there is no colorable claim of alteration" (citing People v Sangster, 2014 IL App [1st] 113457, ¶ 51, 8 NE3d 1116,
1127 [2014])], affd 2020 CO 71, 471 P3d 1059 [Colo 2020]). As the Reporter to the Advisory Committee has
observed, "a contention such as 'it might be a deepfake' or 'deepfakes are easy to do' has to be a nonevent"
(Daniel J. Capra, Deepfakes Reach the Advisory Committee on Evidence Rules, 92 Fordham L Rev 2491, 2506
[2024]). Yet the majority rests its holding on sheer surmise that because B.W. had some "technical savvy," he
might have created a deepfake (majority op at 9 n 4). The majority identifies no legal authority supporting its
reactionary approach.

Chaos will ensue. For example, must every proponent of surveillance footage now introduce expert forensic
testimony to authenticate it, in any proceeding in any of our courts? What about a criminal defendant offering a
video establishing an alibi, if the People cry "deepfake" in response? Must the defendant either find and pay for
an authentication expert, or take the stand to testify to their personal knowledge of the video's accuracy—and
waive their Fifth Amendment privilege in the process? Are videos such as traffic cameras, video doorbell
cameras, and the like now subject to the majority's presumption of deepfake forgery? More broadly still, what
about every other medium susceptible to fakery, such as writings, signatures, and still images? The majority
purports to address videos, but I am unable to discern any principled reason why its holding does not equally
apply to every other form of evidentiary exhibit. The majority's ho-hum approach blithely raises all of these
questions and more.

The majority opinion is therefore more than shortsighted. It is troubling, and its consequences will be grave. In
practicality, in child-protective proceedings, the majority places the onus on child victims to authenticate videos
that their abusers and pornographers create. Above all, the majority returns a child victim to an abuser's care by
holding for the first time—in a case predating the possibility of wholesale deepfake video forgery—that sheer
speculation of such forgery renders sex-abuse videos inadmissible absent testimony by an observer, a
participant, or [*12]an expert. In the wake of the majority's reckless holding, Family Court, criminal, and civil
litigants alike will surely raise a deepfake defense, however baseless, when faced with unfavorable evidentiary
exhibits of all kinds, and the most vulnerable among us will suffer the consequences.
   We use cookies to improve the experience of our website. By continuing to use our
   website, you consent to the use of cookies. To understand more about how we use          Accept & Continue
I dissent.
   cookies, please see our Privacy Policy.
Orders reversed, without costs, and petitions dismissed. Opinion by Chief Judge Wilson. Judges Rivera,
Cannataro and Halligan concur. Judge Troutman dissents in an opinion in which Judges Garcia and Singas
concur, Judge Singas in a separate dissenting opinion in which Judge Garcia concurs.

Decided February 17, 2026

                                                      Footnotes




Footnote 1: The videos at issue were destroyed by Family Court order in August 2024, a month after M.H.
moved for leave to appeal to this Court. Destruction of evidence before the exhaustion of the appellate process
(and any subsequently ordered proceedings below) should not be countenanced.

Footnote 2: There is a discrepancy between the testimony of Agent Baranski, that B.W. told him he hacked into
camera feeds (as opposed to the computer itself), and Family Court's finding that B.W. "had hacked [D.K.'s]
computer and downloaded the video from there."




Footnote 3: Judge Singas's assertion that B.W. would never provide authentication testimony without a
cooperation agreement (Singas J., dissenting op at 7-8) is at odds with the fact that B.W. voluntarily spoke with
the FBI and turned over to them evidence, including incriminating material. Indeed, Agent Baranski testified,
based on his discussions with the assistant U.S. attorney on B.W.'s case, that B.W. "was not given any
cooperation agreement." Furthermore, the record does not show any effort by the County to secure
authentication evidence from B.W., whether by live testimony, deposition or affidavit.

Footnote 4: Traders of child pornography splice and edit videos to enhance their appeal to persons interested
in child pornography (see Amicus Br. of Center for Integrity in Forensic Sciences at 15-16). Moreover, the
suspect's ability to hack into computers and cameras of far-away people, with whom he had no connection,
suggests he possessed the technical savvy to manipulate video images (id.).


Footnote 5: Judge Singas hinges most of her dissent on the claim that video manipulation using deepfake
technology was "impossible" around the time the videos were recovered (Singas, J., dissenting op at 5). Again,
that point is not germane to whether the video here was properly authenticated. But for those interested in the
accuracy of her claim, we echo her invitation to readers to see for themselves (id. at 4). Open-source tools
capable of making "deepfakes" were widely available as of 2017, when the term "deepfake" emerged after videos
depicting celebrity pornography were routinely circulated on social media sites; artificial intelligence only
bolstered the abilities of lay persons to make these videos (see Cade Metz, Internet Companies Prepare to Fight
the 'Deepfake' Future, NY Times [Nov. 24, 2019] available at
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/11/24/technology/tech-companies-deepfakes.html [last accessed Feb. 10,
2026]; Kevin Roose, Here Come the Fake Videos, Too, NY Times [Mar. 4, 2018], available at
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/04/technology/fake-videos-deepfakes.html
  We use cookies to improve the experience     of our website. By continuing to use our [last accessed Feb. 10, 2026]).
The  exemplars
  website, you of realistic
               consent      videos
                        to the     manipulated
                               use of cookies. To by this technology
                                                   understand          are too
                                                               more about      numerous
                                                                           how we  use     to recite here&(see,
                                                                                                 Accept         e.g.,
                                                                                                           Continue
  cookies,
Kartik     please see
       Hosanagar,     our Privacy
                   Deepfake        Policy. Is Now a Threat to Everyone. What Do We Do?, Wall Street Journal
                               Technology
[Dec. 7, 2021], available at https://www.wsj.com/tech/ai/deepfake-technology-is-now-a-threat-to-everyone-
what-do-we-do-11638887121?msockid=0b493934559e68d519052f1254876973 [last accessed Feb. 10, 2026]
[accompanying video showing multiple exemplars]).




Footnote 6: See Andrew Lewis et al., Deepfake detection with and without content warnings (Royal Soc'y
Open Science) (Nov. 2023), available at https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10679876/ (last accessed
Feb. 10, 2026) (finding that familiarity with an actor depicted in a fake video did not improve odds of detecting
deepfake of that actor).

Footnote 7: Puzzlingly, one dissent credits the fact that in Patterson, the Appellate Division relied on the fact a
police officer testified as to the "physical layout" of the store (Troutman, J., dissenting op at 6-7). But the mode
by which that video was authenticated was one this Court deemed insufficient (Patterson, 242 AD2d at 741).


Footnote 8: Our dissenting colleagues' characterization of the issue as weight of the evidence is misplaced (see
Troutman, J., dissenting op at 6-7; Singas, J., dissenting op at 7). Authentication and other rules of evidentiary
admissibility determine what is to be weighed, not how much weight to give.

Footnote 1: A "deepfake" video is, essentially, a "genuine-looking video that makes real people appear to do
and say things they never did or said" (Riana Pfefferkorn, "Deepfakes" in the Courtroom, 29 BU Pub Int LJ 245,
245 [2020]).




Footnote 2: A 2020 law review article on the subject asserted that "[a]t present, there are likely only a handful"
of expert witnesses who are qualified to assess allegedly deepfake videos, and their numbers "will not grow
quickly" (see Pfefferkorn, 29 BU Pub Int LJ at 265). This is because "[t]he necessary forensic expertise to detect
deepfakes requires a specialized background in a field with complex barriers to entry, meaning the few who have
it can command top dollar for their services" (id.). Paying "top dollar" for such an expert witness is likely beyond
the financial resources of most local child protective agencies.




Footnote 3: Like the majority (see majority op at 6), I will not address the remaining issues raised by the
mother on this appeal, except to note that I would affirm the Appellate Division order in all other respects.


Footnote 1: Like Judge Troutman, I would affirm the Appellate Division order in all respects.




  We use cookies to improve the experience of our website. By continuing to use our
  website, you consent to the use of cookies. To understand more about how we use           Accept & Continue
  cookies, please see our Privacy Policy.
Some case metadata and case summaries were written with the help of AI, which can produce inaccuracies. You should read the
full case before relying on it for legal research purposes.




  We use cookies to improve the experience of our website. By continuing to use our
  website, you consent to the use of cookies. To understand more about how we use                 Accept & Continue
  cookies, please see our Privacy Policy.
