                                                    Date Issued: September 15, 2025

                                                              File: SC-2024-005378

                                                                 Type: Small Claims


                             Civil Resolution Tribunal

Indexed as: Agyeman (dba Learn and Drive Academy) v. Hosseinzadmoghadasi, 2025
                                 BCCRT 1278


  BETWEEN:


            JOSEPH AGYEMAN (Doing Business As LEARN AND DRIVE
            ACADEMY)

                                                                     APPLICANT


  AND:


            MARYNA HOSSEINZADMOGHADASI

                                                                  RESPONDENT



                           REASONS FOR DECISION


Tribunal Member:                                                    Deanna Rivers


INTRODUCTION

1. The applicant, Joseph Agyeman, doing business as Learn and Drive Academy, runs
   a driver training business. The respondent, Maryna Hosseinzadmoghadasi, was in
   an accident during her road test in Mr. Agyeman’s car. Mr. Agyeman says he
   incurred costs due to the accident, including $2,442 for car rental, $3,391.34 for the
   money he spent converting the car to a driver training vehicle, $500 for his
   insurance deductible, and $10,000 for lost income. He claims half of those costs,
   totalling $8,166.67. To fit within the Civil Resolution Tribunal’s (CRT) small claims
   jurisdiction, Mr. Agyeman limits his claim to $5,000.

2. The respondent agrees she was in the accident. She says as a student she is not
   responsible for the damage. She says Mr. Agyeman’s insurance should cover his
   costs.

3. Each party represents themselves.

4. For the following reasons, I dismiss Mr. Agyeman’s claims.


JURISDICTION AND PROCEDURE

5. The CRT has jurisdiction over small claims brought under Civil Resolution Tribunal
   Act (CRTA) section 118. The CRT’s mandate is to provide dispute resolution
   services accessibly, quickly, economically, informally, and flexibly. In resolving
   disputes, the CRT must apply principles of law and fairness. These are the CRT’s
   formal written reasons.

6. CRTA section 39 says the CRT has discretion to decide the hearing’s format,
   including by writing, telephone, videoconferencing, email, or a combination of these.
   The parties in this dispute each say the other is not being truthful. However, I find
   the outcome of this dispute turns on the applicable law and the evidence I refer to
   below. Bearing in mind the CRT’s mandate that includes proportionality and a
   speedy resolution of disputes, I find that I am properly able to assess and weigh the
   documentary evidence and submissions before me. I find that an oral hearing is not
   necessary in the interests of justice.

7. CRTA section 42 says the CRT may accept as evidence information that it
   considers relevant, necessary, and appropriate, whether or not the information
   would be admissible in court.


                                            2
8. In his written argument, Mr. Agyeman asks for an order that the respondent’s
    husband remove his online reviews of Mr. Agyeman’s business. However, asking
    someone to do something, such as remove a review, is a form of injunctive relief.
    With limited exceptions that do not apply here, injunctive orders are outside the
    CRT’s small claims jurisdiction. Further, the respondent’s husband is not a party to
    this dispute. So, I do not have jurisdiction to make such and order, and I have not
    considered this request further.


ISSUES

9. The issues in this dispute are:

    a. Is Mr. Agyeman entitled to reimbursement for his car rental, the cost to convert
       the car to a drivers’ training vehicle, and his insurance deductible?

    b. Is Mr. Agyeman entitled to compensation for lost income?


EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS

10. In a civil proceeding like this one, Mr. Agyeman, as applicant, must prove his claim
    on a balance of probabilities, meaning more likely than not. I have read both parties’
    submissions and evidence but refer only to the evidence and argument that I find
    relevant to provide context for my decision.

11. Mr. Agyeman provided an overview of the Insurance Corporation of British
    Columbia’s (ICBC) policies prepared by generative artificial intelligence (AI). The
    BC Supreme Court and the CRT have discussed the risks of relying on generative
    AI tools, as the output is often inaccurate. The document was not written by an
    expert and is not a business record. So, it does not help prove any facts and is not
    reliable evidence. I did not consider it in making my decision.

12. The basic facts are not disputed. On December 4, 2023, the respondent was
    involved in a motor vehicle accident while driving Mr. Agyeman’s student driver car.
    ICBC found her 100% at fault for the accident.


                                            3
13. The car had been modified for use as a driver training vehicle. ICBC paid Mr.
    Agyeman the car’s value, less the $500 deductible.

Is Mr. Agyeman entitled to reimbursement for his car rental, the cost to
convert the car to a drivers’ training vehicle, and his insurance deductible?

14. I find Mr. Agyeman is not entitled to reimbursement for these costs, because they
    are barred by the Insurance (Vehicle) Act (IVA).

15. As I set out above, Mr. Agyeman claims half of the following costs: $2,442 for car
    rental, $3,391.34 for money he spent to convert the car into a driver training vehicle,
    and $500 for his insurance deductible.

16. Since May 1, 2021, IVA section 172 says a person cannot sue for vehicle damage
    caused by an accident between two or more vehicles. The exceptions set out in the
    Basic Vehicle Damage Coverage Regulation section 6(2), such as for unlicenced
    vehicles and leased vehicles, do not apply.

17. So, if Mr. Agyeman’s claims are within the definition of vehicle damage, he does not
    have a right to bring this claim. Relevant to this dispute, IVA section 170 says, in
    part, vehicle damage means damage to or loss of the vehicle, loss of use of the
    vehicle, and damage to or loss of permanently attached equipment.

18. First, I find the car rental was necessary because the accident damage meant his
    car could not be used. So, I find the rental costs fall within loss of use of the vehicle
    under IVA section 170.

19. Second, although Mr. Agyeman did not explain what was needed to convert the car
    into a driver training vehicle, I find that this claim involves loss of or damage to
    permanently attached equipment. So, I find it qualifies as vehicle damage under IVA
    section 170.

20. Finally, I note IVA section 170 does not specifically mention insurance deductibles.
    However, in the previous CRT decision Mark v. Windley Contracting Ltd., 2023
    BCCRT 579, a vice chair found that a deductible was part of vehicle damage. That


                                              4
    decision is not binding on me, but I agree with it. The deductible is not a cost Mr.
    Agyeman paid due to the accident. Instead, it reflects the part of the vehicle’s value
    not covered by his insurance with ICBC. I find that the deductible is a part of the
    compensation for the damage to or loss of the car under section 170.

21. As I find each of Mr. Agyeman’s claims falls within the meaning of vehicle damage
    under IVA section 170, they are statute-barred by IVA section 172. Therefore, I
    must dismiss these claims.

Is Mr. Agyeman entitled to compensation for lost income?

22. I find Mr. Agyeman is not entitled to compensation for lost income arising from an
    inability to use his modified vehicle because he did not provide any evidence to
    support his claim.

23. Mr. Agyeman says he lost $10,000 in income while he did not have a driver training
    vehicle. He claims half that amount, or $5,000.

24. Mr. Agyeman provided 2 undated text messages saying he had to cancel
    appointments because of the accident. However, he did not provide any other
    evidence to support this claim, such as how many lessons he could not book or had
    to cancel, or how much he charged for each lesson.

25. I find that Mr. Agyeman has not proved he lost income due to the accident. I dismiss
    this claim.

26. Under CRTA section 49 and CRT rules, the CRT will generally order an
    unsuccessful party to reimburse a successful party for CRT fees and reasonable
    dispute-related expenses. As Mr. Agyeman was not successful, I dismiss his claim
    for reimbursement of CRT fees. The respondent did not pay CRT fees.

27. Neither party claimed any dispute-related expenses.




                                             5
ORDER

28. I dismiss Mr. Agyeman’s claims.




                                          Deanna Rivers, Tribunal Member




                                      6
