                        Court of King’s Bench of Alberta

Citation: R v Flett, 2026 ABKB 296




                                                                                                 2026 ABKB 296 (CanLII)
                                                                             Date: 20260417
                                                                       Docket: 240291385Q1
                                                                      Registry: Ft. McMurray



Between:

                                    His Majesty the King



                                                                                        Crown
                                            - and -




                                      Kylar Flett and
                                    Dominic Mills-Bruno




                                                                                      Accused



             _______________________________________________________

                               Reasons for Judgment
                                      of the
                           Honourable Justice N.E. Devlin
             _______________________________________________________

Overview
[1]   The Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) in Fort Chipewyan received a call that
Snapchat videos of men brandishing a handgun in a vehicle were circulating in the small
community. Police viewed the videos, believed they knew the men involved, identified a suspect
                                                Page: 2


vehicle, found the car within minutes, extracted the occupants, who were dressed identically to
the men seen on the video, and located the gun under the rear passenger seat.
[2]    The men inside the car were charged with numerous offences related to the gun’s
presence. The video’s ostensible maker, Jimmy Houle, has since passed away. The driver, Bruce
George Lepine, failed to appear for trial. The alleged holder of the gun, Kylar Flett, and the man
who was seated beside him at the time of arrest, Dominic Mills-Bruno, stood trial before me.




                                                                                                          2026 ABKB 296 (CanLII)
[3]    The defence challenged the admissibility of the Snapchat videos on several related
grounds. I provided a summary mid-trial ruling that the videos were admissible and indicated I
would give full written reasons for that decision. These are those reasons, together with my
decision on the trial itself.

Facts
[4]     Around noon on April 5, 2024, the RCMP in Fort Chipewyan received a call for service
from a community member who reported that certain known individuals were driving around
with a gun and had posted their misadventures on Snapchat. Sgt Davison and Constable
Borowdaka went directly to the caller’s home, only a short distance from their detachment.

            The videos viewed and recorded

[5]      At the caller’s home, the officers viewed the Snapchat videos and made screen recordings
of them playing on the caller’s phone. The three short clips, which appeared to be Snapchat
stories, showed four men in a car, sometimes masked. The rear seat passenger was waving what
looked like a semi-automatic pistol in his left hand, and flashing signs with the other. Prominent
tattoos were visible on both of his hands. The person seated beside him held a bottle of alcohol
and also flashed signs with his hands, while a third individual video-taped the frivolities from the
front passenger seat. In the video, the driver could be partially seen, wearing a blue sleeved
garment. The two rear-seat passengers were unmasked in the third clip.
[6]      Loud rap music was blaring in the videos, and the scene was constructed in the style of
urban American gangbangers, acting tough and waving weapons. Consistent with selfie-videos
of this sort, the recording is laterally inverted (ie: the scene and the people in it are seen reversed
left to right).
[7]     The officers identified the gun-holder as Kylar Flett, and the man filming the videos as
Jimmy Houle. This latter identification was bolstered by the fact that the Snaps had a username
of “Jim 2times”. The officers knew “Jimmy Two Times” to be Mr. Houle’s nickname. Based on
the information they gleaned from the videos, taken together with information from the caller,
the police came to the conclusion that the car involved likely belonged to George Lepine, as they
had had their own extensive dealings with him and his vehicle.
[8]    Constable Borowdaka, who had the longest connection to the community, also believed
he recognized Mr. Mills-Bruno as the other backseat passenger from a portion of the videos.
[9]     In the phone-to-phone screen capture, a clock display in the top left corner of the original
screen being recorded reads “11:48”. As the police made their screen recording of the caller’s
phone sometime shortly after noon, officers testified that this was the time displayed on the
caller’s phone when he screen-recorded the original Snapchat videos.
                                             Page: 3


[10] Also visible on the recordings, as part of the captured Snaps, were the words “24 minutes
ago” beneath the username “Jim 2times” on two of the clips, and “34s ago” on the final clip.
These times were interpreted by the witnesses (consonant with judicial notice I would take as to
how short-video story postings work on most social media platforms) as signifying that the
stories had been posted 24 minutes, and 34 seconds, prior to the times they were recorded by the
caller, respectively. The officers took this, together with what they learned from the complainant,




                                                                                                      2026 ABKB 296 (CanLII)
to mean that the images had been recently broadcast.
[11] The prompt “Send a chat” in the text-entry bar at the bottom of the recorded screen
further identifies the original screen recording as being from the Snapchat app.

           Events on the ground

[12] Deeply concerned that the dangerous conduct depicted in the videos was ongoing in real
time in their community, the police immediately set out to find the suspect vehicle. Constable
Borowdaka knew that Mr. Lepine’s vehicle was a black Hyundai Kona, which he described as
being unique in Fort Chipewyan.
[13] By way of relevant background, Fort Chipewyan is a small town on the southwestern
corner of Lake Athabasca, near the confluence of the Peace and Slave rivers. Its population is
just upwards of 800 and the hamlet covers a small, compact geographic area. It is inaccessible by
road between spring breakup and the opening of the ice roads in the winter and would have been
isolated from outside vehicular traffic at the time of these events. Consequently, the police had
strong reason to infer that the dangerous acts being filmed in the vehicle were happening
contemporaneously in the community. They immediately left the caller’s residence in search of
the vehicle.
[14] The Hyundai and its occupants were not hard to find. Sgt Davison and Constable
Borowdaka spotted the vehicle moments after leaving the caller’s home, driving down the town’s
main road. They radioed ahead to their backup officer, Corporal Phillips, and the suspect vehicle
passed him moments later as he exited the detachment.
[15] Corporal Phillips pulled in behind the Hyundai and initiated a traffic stop. The vehicle
turned off the main road and parked in the lot of a housing development. Corporal Phillips pulled
up behind it, and Sgt. Davison and Constable Borowdaka’s vehicle arrived moments later.
[16] The RCMP officers exited their vehicles with rifles drawn and executed a high-risk
takedown. Through verbal commands they directed the men in the Hyundai to exit the vehicle
one by one. Their emergence and arrest was captured with clarity by the dash camera of Corporal
Phillips’ cruiser.
[17]    The first to exit, from the rear passenger seat of the Kona, was Kylar Flett. He was
wearing the same black hoodie with white writing, and grey baseball cap with a distinctive white
logo, appearing to be that of the Blue Jays, seen in the Snapchat video. He visibly responded to
his name when it was used in verbal commands, and walked backwards to the police cars, as
directed.
[18] As he approached the officers, Mr. Flett pulled up his balaclava to cover his mouth and
nose, precisely as had been seen in the video. He also behaved in a flippant manner by taking out
his cell phone while re-donning the balaclava. He can be heard on the video yelling about why he
was being arrested and saying “where’s the weapon” somewhat sarcastically.
                                              Page: 4


[19] Mr. Flett did not comply with the physical arrest procedure. Sgt Davison had to use force,
and required the assistance of Constable Borowdaka, to take Mr. Flett to the ground and secure
him in handcuffs. This behaviour is the genesis of the resisting charge laid against him as Count
15. It was not captured on the dashcam video as it occurred behind Corporal Phillips’ cruiser.
[20] The second man to exit, again from the same seating position he occupied in the video,
being the rear driver’s side seat, was Mr. Mills-Bruno. He also wore the same attire seen in the




                                                                                                     2026 ABKB 296 (CanLII)
video: a grey hoodie and a black ball cap featuring a distinctive white star logo. He cooperated
and was taken into custody.
[21] The next man to exit the car was the front seat passenger. It was, as predicted by the
video, Jimmy Houle. He also wore the same clothing as in the video, specifically a grey hoodie
and a grey baseball cap with a black rim and a distinctive circular black and white logo. He was
taken into custody without incident.
[22] Finally, the driver, George Lepine, exited the vehicle. He was wearing blue sweatpants
and a matching sweater, consistent with the small glimpses caught of his extremities on the
Snapchat video. He was also arrested without incident.
[23]    The vehicle was then searched. It was messy. The rear bench seat, on the passenger side,
was visibly detached from the vehicle’s frame. In the resulting gap, Corporal Phillips found a
handgun. The hammer of the gun was cocked when it was located. The gun was photographed as
found in situ, before being proven safe. It was loaded and had a round chambered. In total, two
unfired rounds were ejected from the gun.
[24] The weapon was a 1911-style Chiappa, chambered in .22 calibre. The frame and the slide
were made of black anodized metal and showed significant finish wear. The grip was adorned
with a reddish-brown textured material, sporting the Chiappa logo, screwed onto the frame.

           The gun seen in the video compared to the one found in real life

[25] The Crown produced enlarged freeze-frames from the Snapchat videos. One image (at
page 4) shows the gun in Mr. Flett’s hand relatively clearly. It is possible to discern brown
colouration on the grip. Wear marks on the muzzle and along a curve in the slide can be seen in
the video frame, where the finish has rubbed off the metal. These exactly match what is seen on
photos of the gun seized in the vehicle.
[26] The gun was found with the grip facing into the vehicle, the hammer towards the top
corner of the seat opening, and the barrel pointing towards the back of the vehicle. This
orientation is consistent with the rear passenger holding the gun in their inboard (left) hand,
reaching down, and tucking it under the seat.
[27] Both a fresh and a spent .22 cartridge were found in the front passenger area, one along
the door sill and the other along the centre console, both lying in plain sight.

The parties’ positions on admissibility of the videos
[28] The Crown sought to admit the videos on the basis that they provided compelling
evidence of the accused’s guilt, showing them openly committing the offences charged at times
closely proximate to their arrest. This evidence, the Crown alleged, was seminally relevant to the
accused’s state of knowledge regarding the firearm at the time it was recovered from the vehicle.
                                                Page: 5


[29] Relying on R v Bulldog, 2015 ABCA 251 at para 37, the Crown argued that the videos
were “authenticated” by the circumstantial evidence of what the police found in real life very
shortly after viewing them.
[30] The defence strenuously opposed admissibility of the videos. They argued that they were
not properly authenticated, there was no evidence of where, when, how, or under what
circumstances they had been created, and that alteration or outright falsification had not been




                                                                                                          2026 ABKB 296 (CanLII)
disproven.

Principles of admissibility of social media videos
[31] Whether a video is admissible, versus whether it provides reliable evidence of what it
depicts that should be accorded weight in the trial, are two different and discrete inquiries. The
first is conducted by the trial judge on an admissibility voir dire, the second is part of the trier of
facts’ core function. The governing principles of these analyses are helpfully summarized in
Gerald Chan & Susan Magotiaux, Digital Evidence, 3rd ed (Toronto: Emond Publishing,
forthcoming) Part III.
[32] The first stage in assessing the admissibility of a video (or any electronic document) is
“authentication”. The name of this step, while deeply ingrained in the common law and relevant
statutes, is misleading. This step is neither a determination of the document’s ultimate
authenticity, nor of whether it should be “believed” and accorded weight in the trial. Rather, it is
a preliminary inquiry into whether there is evidence capable of proving that the video in fact
shows what it is advertised to show, and may thus go to the trier of fact to evaluate, accept, or
reject: R v CB, 2019 ONCA 380 at para 78. This step might be better called “threshold
authenticity”.

            Threshold authenticity

[33] For electronic documents, this step is governed by s 31.1 of the Canada Evidence Act,
RSC, 1985, c C‑5. This provision codifies the common law requirements for “authentication”:
        Authentication of electronic documents
        31.1 Any person seeking to admit an electronic document as evidence has the
        burden of proving its authenticity by evidence capable of supporting a finding that
        the electronic document is that which it is purported to be. [emphasis added]
[34] Critically, answering this question does not determine conclusively whether the
document is what it purports to be. The party tendering social media videos does not have to
prove that they are “real” for them to be admissible: SJ c R, 2024 QCCA 253 at para 87. At this
stage, the Court is only deciding whether the trier of fact would have a basis to find that the
videos accurately depict their purported contents, not whether they should make that finding.
[35] Ultimate authenticity of the video, and assessment of what, if any weight should be
accorded to it, are questions for the trier of fact: CB at para 72; R v Martin, 2021 NLCA 1 at
para 49; R v Oland, 2015 NBQB 245 at para 56, citing Watt’s Manual of Criminal Law
(Carswell, 2015) notes at p. 1088.
[36] Threshold authenticity is a modest evidentiary requirement: CB at para 67-68: SJ at para
84. All that must be shown is that evidence exists which is capable of proving that the document
                                                Page: 6


is what it is said to be: CB at paras 66-68. The voir dire judge does not make a final
determination on the veracity and value of the corroborative evidence any more than on the
accuracy and worth of the video itself. Rather, the task is to determine that admissible evidence
exists that could satisfy the trier of fact that the video is an accurate depiction of what it is said to
be. As stated in Digital Evidence, “Authentication is, therefore, nothing more than a threshold
test requiring that there be some basis for leaving the evidence to the fact-finder for ultimate




                                                                                                            2026 ABKB 296 (CanLII)
evaluation.”
[37] Logically, the standard of proof required to meet this “not onerous” threshold is less than
balance of probabilities. In my view, the question is best conceptually addressed in similar
fashion to the function of a committal judge at a preliminary hearing. Where direct evidence is
proffered that the video is what it purports to be, its threshold authenticity is proven and the
evidence goes to the trier of fact, subject to any other admissibility issues. For instance, if a
witness says: “I was there and that’s what it looked like”, threshold authenticity is satisfied.
[38] There is equally no question that the threshold authenticity of a video may be established
through circumstantial evidence: Bulldog at para 37. Where the corroborative evidence is
circumstantial, the Supreme Court’s refinement of the “some evidence” requirement applies: R v
Arcuri, 2001 SCC 54 at para 23, and the judge may engage in limited weighing of the inference
being advanced and any competing evidence undermining it. It is important, however, that a
judge performing this function does not trench on the trier of fact’s domain by slipping into an
ultimate determination of authenticity: R v Jackson, 2016 ONCA 736 at para 26.
[39] Just as at a preliminary inquiry, any other applicable admissibility requirements need to
be met. For instance, in cases where a mere viewer of the video (as opposed to someone who
could compare it to their own real-life experiences) purports to identify individuals in the video,
the principles for such identification articulated in R v Leaney, 1989 CanLII 28 (SCC), [1989] 2
SCR 393 would apply. Where an accused person’s statement to an individual in authority is
relied on for authentication, the requirements of voluntariness would apply, etc.

Authentication in this case
[40] The videos in this case purport to be a series of social media stories showing the accused
in a car, waving a handgun, acting like wanna-be gangsters. The evidence offered as capable of
showing that the videos in fact accurately depict this, is that the officers located, within minutes,
the very vehicle and occupants seen in the videos, dressed the same and seated in the same
positions, sitting atop a handgun matching the one shown in the video, found exactly where one
would expect if the person brandishing it in the video had tucked it in the under-seat hiding spot.
[41] The complete similarity of the real-life findings to what is seen on the videos is evidence
capable of confirming what the video shows. This convergence of real-life circumstances
provides ample evidence from which a trier of fact could decide that the videos accurately depict
their advertised content. This evidence meets the threshold standard of proof, however defined.
[42] The defence focus on the quality of the identification of the men from the video is a red
herring. The officers’ belief that they knew who was in the videos is peripheral to the real issue.
In this somewhat unique case, the mechanism of authentication is that the police found, in the
flesh, the exact scene depicted in the videos, moments after watching them.
                                                       Page: 7


[43] In short, identification of the accused flows from their definitive identification when
arrested in real life, to establish that they were the men seen in the video, not the other way
around. I accept the officers’ evidence that they knew the men in the car from their work in the
community, and specifically identified them as they exited the vehicle and were arrested.
[44] This is a case where someone who did not make the visual representation at issue, or
even have any firsthand knowledge of its production, can identify it as accurately depicting




                                                                                                                       2026 ABKB 296 (CanLII)
something they do have firsthand knowledge of in real life: R v George, 2023 ONCJ at para 23.
[45] Since I am not reliant on the identification of the accused from the videos as
corroboration of their contents, I need not engage in a Leaney analysis of those identifications.1
Rather, I can look to the fact that four people were found in a car, dressed exactly the same as in
the video (right down to Mr. Flett’s face covering), seated as in the video, waving the same gun
as seen in the video, behaving (in Mr. Flett’s case) with the same ignorant bravado seen in the
video. Matching those first-hand, real-life observations to the contents of the videos is capable of
proving that the videos depict these same four men and their behaviours, relatively recently.
[46] Finally, the fact that the Snapchat profile name shown on the videos matched the
nickname of the person believed to be recording it provides additional circumstantial evidence
for authentication: R v Hirsch, 2017 SKCA 14 at paras 19-21.
[47]     The Crown has easily satisfied s 31.1 and threshold authenticity is established.

             The Best Evidence rule

[48] The fact that what was tendered before the Court is a copy of a copy of a video ostensibly
posted on social media also matters little to the question of admissibility: Martin at paras 26-29;
SJ at para 90. The concepts of documentary ‘originals’ and the best evidence rule have had to
adapt to digital realities, where these concepts apply differently, if at all. The Canada Evidence
Act now deals with the “best evidence” of electronic documents as follows:
         31.2 (1) The best evidence rule in respect of an electronic document is satisfied
         (a) on proof of the integrity of the electronic documents system by or in which the
         electronic document was recorded or stored;
[49] In the case of a screen recording taken of a screen capture, the system whose integrity
must be established is that of the recorder whose version is presented in court. This is a low
threshold, usually easily met: Martin at para 49; SJ at para 89. The Ontario Court of Justice dealt
effectively with this point in R v Francis-Simms, 2020 ONCJ 632 at para 110, a case also
involving screen-captured evidence of Snapchat videos, where West J. held that:
         Under s. 31.3(a), if a witness provided evidence that a video was shown on a cell
         phone using the Snapchat app and they then used their cell phone to record the
         video they had watched and when they replayed the video they recorded on their
         phone, it was the same as the original Snapchat video they had watched, this
         would be circumstantial evidence that the electronic document systems (the two
         cell phones) were operating properly....


  The caller’s hearsay identifications are not evidence for the truth of their contents and are included simply as a
[1]

narrative of how the vehicle was found and arrests made. The same is true for the clocks displayed on the phones.
                                             Page: 8


[50] I agree with and adopt this analysis. In this case, it was clear that the RCMP officers had
successfully recorded the video playing on the caller’s phone and could present this recording to
the Court. Questions of quality loss between copies of copies of electronic documents will
generally go to their weight. The best evidence rule is satisfied.

           Authorship not a concern




                                                                                                     2026 ABKB 296 (CanLII)
[51] Authorship of the video is not relevant in this case, as it does not go to any essential
issue: see Digital Evidence.

Alteration or fabrication
[52] Defence counsel argued that the recent and rapid rise of AI-generated video and
“deepfakes” should lead the Court to rule the videos inadmissible absent evidence they are real
and unaltered. As a starting point, the Court is alive and sympathetic to these concerns. The
lightning advance of technology has brought into question the reality of far too many things once
held sacredly accurate.
[53] That said, whether a social media post is real and unaltered is normally not a question
going to admissibility. Concerns over tampering or distortion are questions of weight, not
admissibility. The rise of AI has not changed this foundational principle. As the Court of Appeal
held in CB at para 72:
       [E]ven if there were an air of reality to such a claim [of tampering or
       falsification], the low threshold for authentication, whether at common law or
       under s. 31.1 of the CEA, would seem to assign such a prospect to an assessment
       of weight.
[54] I do not rule out the possibility that, in an appropriate case, evidence of alteration or
fabrication could be led at the admissibility stage in an attempt to overcome circumstantial
evidence of authenticity. How such a contest of evidence would play out in an Arcuri-informed
analysis is for another day. However, merely raising the spectre of “deepfakes” in the abstract is
not enough to undercut circumstantial threshold authenticity.
[55] In this case, no evidence was presented that called the provenance and integrity of the
video into question, and the subsequent discovery of the very scene depicted in it powerfully
implies its ultimate authenticity.

Conclusion on admissibility
[56] There is ample evidence capable of proving that the video depicts the two accused, and
two other known individuals, riding in a car with one of them brandishing a handgun. The phone
on which the copy presented to the court captured it was functioning properly, and the version
available as evidence is admissible.

Trial Decision
[57] On the trial, I must determine whether the Crown has proven each charge beyond a
reasonable doubt. I bear in mind that proof beyond a reasonable doubt is much closer to certainty
than a balance of probabilities and requires that I be sure of the Accused’s guilt. The burden
                                              Page: 9


never shifts to the Accused to prove their innocence, no matter how suspicious the
circumstances. Equally, the grave dangers, and societal concerns, associated with the unlawful
possession of firearms, and their reckless display and handling, in no way operates to prove the
charge or reduce the strict burden of proof – the natural prejudice against such activity forms no
part of this Court’s consideration.
[58] Similarly, Mr. Flett’s status as an individual prohibited from the possession of firearms




                                                                                                     2026 ABKB 296 (CanLII)
also does not diminish the Crown’s strict obligation to prove the charges. While this status
implies prior bad conduct, that in no way assists the Crown in proving the charges.
[59]   The Crown must satisfy its burden solely on the evidence presented before the Court.

           The charges and elements of the offences

[60] Mr. Flett has been charged with possession of a restricted firearm together with readily
accessible ammunition, contrary to s 95(1); possession of a weapon dangerous to the public
peace, contrary to s 88(1); careless handling of a firearm, contrary to s 86(1); unauthorized
possession of a firearm, contrary to s 92(1); and possession of a firearm while prohibited,
contrary to s 117.01(1).
[61]     To establish possession of a restricted firearm together with readily accessible
ammunition, contrary to s 95(1), the Crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Flett:
(a) possessed a firearm; (b) the firearm was a restricted firearm; (c) the firearm was loaded or
ammunition for it was readily accessible; and (d) he did not have the licence and registration
certificate required to possess it, nor an authorization to possess it in the circumstances. The
Crown must also prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Flett knew, or was wilfully blind to
the fact, that the firearm was loaded (or that ammunition was readily accessible); recklessness is
insufficient: R v Eastgaard, 2011 ABCA 152, aff’d 2012 SCC 11.
[62] To establish possession of a weapon dangerous to the public peace, contrary to s 88(1),
the Crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that: (a) Mr. Flett possessed a weapon; and (b)
his purpose in possessing it was a purpose dangerous to the public peace.
[63] To establish careless handling of a firearm, contrary to s 86(1), the Crown must prove
beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Flett used, carried, handled, shipped, transported, or stored a
firearm in a careless manner, without lawful excuse.
[64] To establish unauthorized possession of a firearm, contrary to s 92(1), the Crown must
prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Flett possessed a firearm and that he knew he was not
authorized to possess it.

Analysis
[65] I accept the evidence of the police officers of what they saw and experienced in the
course of their interception and search of Mr. Lepine’s vehicle. They knew these men, identified
them upon arrest, and found the gun and shell casings in the vehicle.
[66] Given the overwhelming similarity between who and what is seen in the Snapchat videos
and who and what was found in the car, I find that the videos show the two accused, along with
Mr. Lepine and the late Mr. Houle, driving around Fort Chipewyan and showing off the gun.
                                              Page: 10


[67] That similarity also creates a powerful inference that the video was recorded close in time
to the vehicle stop and the arrest of the accused. I accept that inference. That inference is
consistent with the time indication on the Snapchat videos, though I need not rely on this hearsay
for anything other than collateral comfort.
[68] I find as a fact that the gun seen in the videos, in Mr. Flett’s inboard hand, is the .22
calibre Chiappa 1911 later found under his seat by the police and proven to be a working firearm




                                                                                                        2026 ABKB 296 (CanLII)
by subsequent testing.
[69] I find as a fact, and am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt, that it is Mr. Flett seen
holding the gun in the Snapchat videos. I make this finding for several reasons. First, he was
positively identified upon arrest. Both Sgt. Davison and Constable Borowdaka knew him well.
They had extensive dealings with him in the year before these events, and his photograph was
displayed at the RCMP detachment as part of another investigation and seen by them daily.
[70] Second, Mr. Flett’s seating position in the video was the same as where he was found in
real life. Third, when his mask was down, the man in the video, and even more so the man being
arrested, resembles Mr. Flett as he appeared before me in Court. Fourth, the man in the video has
the same prominent neck and hands tattoos as Mr. Flett visibly displayed in the courtroom and
on arrest. Fifth, the clothing Mr. Flett wore when he exited the vehicle matched exactly what he
wore in the video, right down to the mask he clowned the police with during the arrest.
[71] I pause to note that the fact that Mr. Flett was apparently well known to police in Fort
Chipewyan carries no weight in proving his possession of the firearm. It simply explains why the
police knew him and could identify him.
[72] Finally, Mr. Flett responded to his name when directed to exit the car and answered to the
charges under his name in court. There is no doubt it is he who was arrested, and no doubt he
was the man seen in the video. For these reasons, I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that
Mr. Flett was in possession of the firearm both in the motor vehicle immediately before his
arrest, as well as at the time the video was filmed.
[73] The videos’ origin timeline also establishes that he had possessed the weapon for at least
some time, and not in a trifling or passing manner. Its heft and real feel would not have escaped
him. Moreover, the presence of fresh and spent .22 rounds in the vehicle strengthen the inference
that he knew the weapon to be a real firearm.
[74] For these reasons, I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Flett knew the gun
was real. I am equally satisfied that he knew, or was at least wilfully blind, to the fact it was
loaded. The casings found outside the gun particularly bolster this already dominant inference.
[75] The facts that (i) the gun met the legal definition of a firearm; (ii) was a restricted
handgun; (iii) had been stolen; that (iv) Mr. Flett had no license to possess it, and in fact (v) was
barred from possessing it by a lifetime section 109 Order, and (vi) was further bound to keep the
peace and be of good behaviour under a probation order at the time of these events, were all
proven by documents and certificates entered as exhibits by agreement.
[76] Finally, waving a loaded handgun around in a crowded car, and especially cocking it
while loaded, is inherently dangerous and therefore the Crown has proven beyond a reasonable
doubt that Mr. Flett used the firearm in a careless manner.
                                             Page: 11


[77] I find that the Crown has established the elements of Counts 1- 4 and Count 9 beyond a
reasonable doubt. Therefore, I find Mr. Flett guilty of:
     Count 1 – possession of a restricted firearm together with readily accessible ammunition,
               contrary to section 95(1);
     Count 2 – careless handling of a firearm, contrary to section 86(1);




                                                                                                       2026 ABKB 296 (CanLII)
     Count 3 – possession of a weapon dangerous to the public peace, contrary to section 88(1);
     Count 4 – unauthorized possession of a firearm, contrary to section 92(1); and
     Count 9 – possession of a firearm while prohibited, contrary to section 117.01(1).
[78] The Crown concedes that there is insufficient evidence to conclude beyond a reasonable
doubt that Mr. Flett knew the weapon was stolen, as the doctrine of recent possession does not
apply. He is found not guilty on Count 6. The Crown also properly did not seek a duplicative
conviction on Count 5, knowingly being in a vehicle with a firearm present.

           The alleged threat

[79] Mr. Flett is also charged with threatening Sgt. Davison, about “fireworks” and ASAP
“popping off”. ASAP was known to him as a local gang. While I am quite sure this was intended
as a threat, the evidence about what he said was quite vague. I am not satisfied beyond a
reasonable doubt that this was a threat specifically to Sgt. Davison, as charged, as opposed to a
generic statement that the gang might be displeased about his arrest. Mr. Flett is found not guilty
on Count 7.

           Resisting arrest

[80] The actus reus of resisting arrest, contrary to s 129(a) of the Criminal Code is active
resistance by forcible means: R v Kennedy, 2016 ONCA 879 at paras 28-36. The antics Mr.
Flett engaged in while walking backwards towards the police would not suffice to make out the
charge. They are, however, consistent with a general attitude or contempt and non-cooperation,
consistent with the level of physical resistance described.
[81] The level of force required to fully gain control of Mr. Flett and handcuff him does
satisfy the physical element of resisting arrest. I accept the officers’ effectively unchallenged
descriptions of those events. Mr. Flett pulled away when they tried to take his phone, requiring
two officers to control him and ultimately take him to the ground. While at the lower end of the
spectrum of resistance, the offence is proven. Viewed in context of his antecedent behaviour, the
mens rea is clear. I find Mr. Flett guilty of Count 15, resisting arrest, contrary to section 129(a)
of the Code.

           Disguise

[82] Mr. Flett is charged that he had his face masked with intent to commit an indictable
offence, contrary to section 351(2). I do not find that there was a sufficient nexus between the
masking and the offences committed to make out the requisite intent, as confirmed by his
removal of the mask in the final video. He is found not guilty on Count 8.
                                             Page: 12


Mr. Mills-Bruno
[83] The Crown seeks a conviction of Mr. Mills-Bruno only on Count 4, knowingly being in a
vehicle where a firearm is present. This offence, as particularized in the Indictment, requires
proof beyond a reasonable doubt that:
          i.   there was a restricted handgun in the car;




                                                                                                     2026 ABKB 296 (CanLII)
         ii.   the accused knew it was there; and
        iii.   the accused knew it was a restricted handgun.
[84] No suggestion was raised that Mr. Mills-Bruno had grounds to believe anyone in the
vehicle was authorized to possess the firearm. The presence of the gun, and its characterization
as a restricted firearm, were clearly proven, and not contested. The remaining issue is Mr. Mills-
Bruno’s subjective state of mind regarding the weapon. From the video, there is no doubt that he
knew of the gun’s presence. He was inches from it as Mr. Flett waved it around.
[85] Therefore, the only issue is whether the Crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt
that Mr. Mills-Bruno knew it was a real firearm, or was wilfully blind to that fact. Wilful
blindness is a form of true, full subjective knowledge that may support a conviction for a full-
knowledge offence, such as that created by s 94(1): R v Briscoe, 2010 SCC 13 at para 21.
[86] A number of circumstances are relevant to this determination. First, unlike many people
who face this charge, I find that Mr. Mills-Bruno obviously knew the gun-shaped object was in
the car. It was inches away from his face. Second, that proximity would let him have a good look
at it. Third, he had been in the car with Mr. Flett and the gun for some time, given the sequence
of events. Fourth, the gun was being used in a context conveying criminal menace.
[87] Finally, as mentioned above, two spent .22 calibre casings were located in the vehicle.
This gives rise to an inference that the firearm was discharged at some point, either in the
vehicle, or by individuals closely associated with the vehicle.
[88] For these reasons, I am satisfied that Mr. Mills-Bruno was at least wilfully blind to the
fact that the gun was real. As Sopinka J. stated in R v Jorgensen, 1995 CanLII 85 (SCC), [1995]
4 SCR 55 at para. 103, “[a] finding of wilful blindness involves an affirmative answer to the
question: Did the accused shut his eyes because he knew or strongly suspected that looking
would fix him with knowledge?”
[89] The arrest video shows that Mr. Mills-Bruno was coherent and functional. I am satisfied
that, even if he did not concretely know the gun was real (which I am sure he did), he certainly
knew that he needed to ask and chose not to, because the answer would land him in the criminal
predicament where he now finds himself.
[90] While the burden rests solely on the Crown to prove Mr. Mills-Bruno’s mens rea, I note,
for sake of completeness, that there are no circumstances present or proven that would have
pointed him away from having a strong subjective concern that the gun was real.
[91]   For these reasons, I find Mr. Mills-Bruno guilty on Count 5.
                                            Page: 13


           Breach of Probation

[92] Mr. Mills-Bruno was proven to be bound be a Peace Bond at the time of the gun incident,
which he obviously breached by his behaviour as proven in this case, contrary to section 127(1).
He is found guilty on Count 14.




                                                                                                   2026 ABKB 296 (CanLII)
Heard on the 10th, 11th and 12th day of March, 2026.
Dated at the City of Ft. McMurray, Alberta this 17th day of April, 2026.




                                                    N.E. Devlin
                                                    J.C.K.B.A.

Appearances:

Anna Gillespie
      for the Crown

Yodit Russom Kidane
       for the Accused Kylar Flett

Graham MacArthur Johnson
      For the Accused Dominic Mills-Bruno
