             IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
                                AT IMPHAL
                           WP(C) No. 70 of 2023

            Md. Zakir Hussain aged about 36 years, S/o Mrs. Khomei of
            Sangaiyumpham Nungphou Mamang P.O. Wangjing & P.S. –
            Thoubal, Thoubal District, Manipur – 795148 earlier serving as
            VDF Thoubal District having V.D.F. No. 1185 presently
            disengaged from the VDF strength.


                                                          …... Petitioner/s
                                         - Versus -

     1.     The        State   of   Manipur      represented    by    the     Chief
            Secretary/Special secretary/Secretary (Home), Government of
            Manipur, Babupara, Old Secretariat South Block P.O. & P.S.
            Imphal, Imphal West District, Manipur – 795001;
     2.     The Director General of Police, Manipur, Babupara, Police
            Headquarter, P.O. & P.S. Imphal, Imphal West District, Manipur
            – 795001;
     3.     The Superintendent of Police, Thoubal District, Thoubal, P.O.
            & P.S. Thoubal, Thoubal District, Manipur – 795138.
                                                          ........Respondent/s

                       B E F O R E
          HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE A. GUNESHWAR SHARMA

  For the petitioner                ::       Mr. Ajmal Hussain, Advocate.

   For the respondents              ::       Mr. Shyam Sharma, G.A.

  Date of Hearing                   ::       08.05.2024
  Date of Judgment and Order        ::       23.05.2024




WP(C) No. 70 of 2023                                                        Page 1
                     JUDGMENT & ORDER (CAV)


[1]           Heard Mr. Ajmal Hussain, learned counsel for the petitioner

and Mr. Shyam Sharma, learned G.A. for the State respondents.


[2]          The present writ petition has been filed under Article 226 of the

Constitution of India to quash and set aside the impugned disengagement

order dated 02.01.2021 issued by the Superintendent of Police, Thoubal.

The petitioner was disengaged from being a member of Village Defence

Force (VDF) without affording an opportunity of being heard and without any

enquiry on allegation of dereliction of duty upon escape of an accused from

police custody.


[3]          Vide order dated 24.10.2015 issued by the Superintendent of

Police, Thoubal, the petitioner was engaged as VDF (Village Defence Force)

bearing VDF No. 1185 in the strength of VDF, Thoubal District and he was

serving in the said discipline for the last 6 years till he was disengaged vide

disengagement order dated 02.01.2021 issued by the Superintendent of

Police, Thoubal on the ground of dereliction of duty without any enquiry.


[4]          On 02.01.2021, the petitioner was assigned duty at Bazar as a

normal course of duty under a commander and on the same day, the

petitioner was assigned another duty for both Gate Sentry as well as to look

after the lock-up during which one accused person namely Naorem Romen

@ Nanao who was in the custody of Thoubal Police station. While the

petitioner was attending his duty, the said accused person escaped from the


WP(C) No. 70 of 2023                                                   Page 2
custody. The incident happened as it was beyond the control of the petitioner

alone, as the other person (the commander) was absent at that time and due

to dilapidated wall/fencing of the police station. Subsequently, the escaped

person was apprehended and re-arrested, but the petitioner was later asked

to stay home by taking away the service ID without assigning any duty and

later on, after 3 or 4 months, the petitioner came to know that he was

disengaged from his service. However, no order copy was served to him at

the time of disengagement from the service.


[5]          The petitioner being aggrieved approached the competent

authorities to review and revoke the impugned disengagement order dated

02.01.2021 and to consider his re-engagement by filing a representation

dated 26.08.2022 to the respondents but the same is not considered till date.


[6]          The respondent No. 3 filed counter affidavit stating that the

petitioner was disengaged and struck off from the strength of Thoubal District

VDF member for his dereliction of his duty in connection with the escape of

one accused person namely Naorem Romen @ Nanao Singh from the police

custody of Thoubal PS while the petitioner was on his duty. It is stated that

on 08.01.2021, an enquiry report was submitted by the Sub-Divisional Police

Officer, Thoubal wherein it is stated that the petitioner who was on sentry

duty had committed negligence and dereliction of duty while on sentry. It is

prayed that the writ petition may be dismissed as being devoid of merit.


[7]          It may be noted that vide order dated 05.12.2023, this Court

directed learned GA to explain the procedures for disengagement of VDF


WP(C) No. 70 of 2023                                                  Page 3
personnel in the proposed counter-affidavit. However, in the counter-affidavit

dated 23.02.2024 filed by the respondent No.3 (Superintendent of Police,

Thoubal), nothing is mentioned in this regard. In the circumstances, this

Court is compelled to do extra research through Google and ChatGTP 3.5.

The following important information regarding the VDF is collected.


[8]          The Village Defence Force, popularly known as VDF, in

Manipur was established to enhance local security and assist the police in

maintaining law and order, especially in the rural areas. Initiated under the

Manipur Police, the VDF consists of volunteers from the local communities

who are trained and equipped to guard their villages against various threats,

including insurgent activities and ethnic violence. After completing the

training successfully and passing any required assessments, the candidates

are formally appointed as members of VDF. Once appointed, VDFs are

assigned duty along with the police force. However, there is no material on

record regarding the service conditions of VDF personnel.


[9]          On further search, this Court comes across an Office

Memorandum dated 18.10.2022 issued by the Home Department,

Government of Manipur laying down service conditions of VDF. The OM,

inter-alia, stipulates at para (vi) that a show cause notice to explain the

charges against a VDF personnel be given mandatorily and an appeal lies

to DIG from any adverse order passed by the SP against a VDF personnel.

However, this OM is not mentioned in the counter-affidavit of the respondent

in spite of specific direction of this Court in order dated 05.12.2023. The OM

is reproduced below:

WP(C) No. 70 of 2023                                                  Page 4
                          “Government of Manipur
                        Secretariat: Home Department
                                   …………

                            Office Memorandum
                        Imphal, the 18th October, 2022

        Subject: Service Conditions of Village Defence Force (VDF).

    No. H/1/2022-HD-HD: The State Government is seized of the issues
    highlighted by the Village Defence Force (VDF) regarding their working
    conditions. In order to improve the engagement conditions of the
    people engaged as Village Defence Force (VDF), the State
    Government has decided to provide the following facilities to VDF
    personnel of the State:

      i.VDF will be given annual increment of Rs. 500/- in the monthly
        honorarium, w.e.f 1th January, 2022 onwards.
     ii.VDF will be allowed to avail 15 days compensatory leave in a year.
    iii.10% of the direct recruitment vacancies in the rank of Police
        Constable and Rifleman may be reserved (horizontal reservation) for
        filling up by eligible VDF personnel.
    iv.Yearly physical & medical test shall be conducted by the police with
        the assistance of Health Department to assess their
        performance/duties.
     v.Three ranks will be created viz: 8 (eight) years of engagement will
        be designated as Corporal and those with 16 (sixteen) years will be
        designated as Sergeant after being found fit by a Screening
        Committee.
    vi.A Show Cause Notice will mandatorily be issued to the VDF
        personnel and given an opportunity to explain in case of any alleged
        charges. Decisions on the Charges including dis-engagement can
        be taken at the level of Superintendent of Police. An appeal against
        the decision can be made to the DIG concerned within 30 days of
        the decision.
   vii.VDF personnel with outstanding performance will be felicitated
        during National and State Level Functions and Police Raising Day
        after proper recommendation by a two tier Committee structure, one
        at District and the higher one being at the State Level.
   viii.Concerned District Superintendent of Police shall take action to enrol
        VDF personnel to eligible health care programme like Ayushman
        Bharat or CHHT. They may also -2-2covered in social security
        schemes such as National Pension Scheme (NPS), Atal Penson
        Yojana Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana, etc. in consultation with Finance
        Department.
    ix.Recruitment criteria/eligibility conditions, age, physical recruitment
        and educational qualifications for future recruitment/engagement of
        VDF will be issued separately.

WP(C) No. 70 of 2023                                                 Page 5
       2.     This has a reference to decision taken by State Cabinet in its
       meeting held on 21.07.2022.
       3.     This is issued with concurrence of FD’s U.O. No. 228/2022-
       2023/FD(PIC), dated 17.07.2022 and DP’s U.O. No. 71/2022-2023/DP
       dated 10/10/2022.

                                  (Rajesh Agrawal)
                             Principal Secretary (Home)
                              Government of Manipur.
                                                …….”

[10]          In a recent case of Nasim Bano v. The State of Manipur &

Ors      [WP(C)     No.209      of   2023     order     dated     17.01.2024]-

MANU/MN/0008/2024, this Court held that even in absence of the statutory

rules, an employee should be given an opportunity of being heard before

terminating his service, when the termination is stigmatic. Relevant para are

reproduced below:


            “[15]           The next question to be decided is whether the
            service of Anganwadi Worker, who is not a regular Government
            Employee, be terminated without any due process when the
            termination order is stigmatic.

            [16]            In the present case, it is admitted fact that the
            petitioner has been appointed in connection with the ICDS Project
            on a monthly honorarium basis and in the appointment order
            dated 08.07.2008, the tenure is not mentioned. In other words, her
            service may be utilised as long as the ICDS Project continues.

            [17]             There is no material on record to indicate
            existence of any Rules or Regulations controlling the service
            conditions of Anganwadi Workers and Helpers. In the cases relied
            by Mr. K. Roshan, learned counsel for the petitioner, at least some
            Rules     and     Regulations     are     there    governing     the
            appointment/engagement of such workers or the employees. On
            bare reading of the impugned order dated 18.08.2022, this Court
            is of the considered view that the termination order is stigmatic,
            because the termination was due to her involvement in a criminal
            case. In fact, the termination order was issued without affording
            any opportunity to the petitioner for her explanation.

            [18]          This Court is of the opinion that at least a Show
            Cause Notice ought to be issued to the petitioner to explain the

WP(C) No. 70 of 2023                                                    Page 6
           circumstances leading to her alleged involvement in the criminal
           case. The decision of Ajit Kumar Nag (Supra) as relied by the
           learned G.A. will not strictly be applicable in the present case, as
           the dismissal without enquiry was done under standing order of
           India Oil Corporation.

           [19]              Accordingly, the impugned order dated
           18.08.2022 issued by the Child Development Project Officer,
           ICDS Project, Imphal East – II, Keirao Bitra is set aside and the
           petitioner be re-instated to her service with continuity of service
           within a period of 30 days from the date of receipt of this order.
           However, the petitioner will not be entitled to back wages for the
           period under termination. It is clarified that the respondents are at
           liberty to take up any action in compliance with the principles of
           natural justice, if so advised.”

[11]         From the case of Nasim Banu (supra), it is clear that even if

the rule is silent or absent, an opportunity of being heard ought to be

provided to an employee before removing him from service. In the present

case, no such opportunity was given to the petitioner before issuing his dis-

engagement order from being a VDF. In short, dis-engagement order is an

alternative term of removal from service. The reason given in the impugned

order is for dereliction of duty which is stigmatic in nature as held in the case

of Nasim Banu (supra). The disengagement order without any notice is bad

on this ground alone.


[12]         As mentioned above in para 9, State Government has issued

an Office Memorandum dated 18.10.2022 laying down the service conditions

of VDF. In para (vi), it is made mandatory to issue show cause notice to a

VDF personnel to explain about the charges against him before passing any

adverse order by SP and appellate forum is provided before DIG.




WP(C) No. 70 of 2023                                                    Page 7
[13]          In the present case, the dis-engagement order (ie, removal

from service) was issued on 02.01.2021 itself, the day on which the accused

escaped from police custody without affording any opportunity. The enquiry

was conducted only on 08.01.2021, where some of the regular police

personnel were awarded with minor penalty. The petitioner was awarded

with a major penalty of removal from service without any show cause and

enquiry. This Court is of the opinion that the disengagement order dated

02.01.2021 passed by the Superintendent of Police, Thoubal is in violation

of the principles of natural justice as held in the case of Nasim Banu. Judicial

note is taken about the subsequent Office Memorandum dated 18.10.2022

stipulating brief service conditions of VDF personnel.


[14]          In the circumstances, the impugned order dated 02.01.2021

disengaging the petitioner from the strength of Thoubal District VDF is set

aside and the petitioner is restored to the strength and roll of VDF Thoubal

with immediate effect. The period between date of disengagement, ie, from

02.01.2021 to 23.05.2024 (date of this order) shall be treated as in service.

The petitioner shall be entitled to 50% of back honorarium and allowances

as admissible. It is clarified that the State respondents are at liberty to

conduct an enquiry in terms of the Office Memorandum dated 18.10.2022

against the petitioner for the alleged dereliction of duty, if so advised, within

a period of three months from the date receipt of a copy of this order, failing

which the same shall stand abated.




WP(C) No. 70 of 2023                                                    Page 8
[15]          With these observations and directions, the writ petition is

allowed. Arrears of honorarium and allowances as directed above shall be

paid within a period of three months from today. No cost.


[16]          Send a copy of this order to the Superintendent of Police,

Thoubal for information and necessary compliance.




                                                            JUDGE

FR/NFR
Kh. Joshua Maring



KH.             Digitally signed
                by KH. JOSHUA
JOSHUA          MARING
                Date: 2024.05.23
MARING          14:56:26 +05'30'




WP(C) No. 70 of 2023                                              Page 9
