                                                            Date Issued: April 10, 2025
                                                          Date Amended: April 17, 2025




                                                                                          2025 BCCRT 453 (CanLII)
                                                                 File: AB-2023-012674
                                                                 Type: Accident Claims
                                                            Category: Accident Benefits


                              Civil Resolution Tribunal

                    Indexed as: Bahia v. ICBC, 2025 BCCRT 453


  BETWEEN:


               ONKAR SINGH BAHIA


                                                                          APPLICANT


  AND:


               INSURANCE CORPORATION OF BRITISH COLUMBIA


                                                                       RESPONDENT



                      AMENDED1 REASONS FOR DECISION


Tribunal Member:                                                       Deanna Rivers



INTRODUCTION

1. This dispute is about Onkar Singh Bahia’s entitlement to income replacement
   benefits.
2. On April 26, 2024, Mr. Bahia, a teacher, was injured when rear-ended while driving.
    Mr. Bahia went off work due to his injuries, using sick time he had accumulated with
    his employer. Once able, he began a graduated return to work (GRTW), but says
    his injuries meant he had to step down from his higher-paying position of




                                                                                             2025 BCCRT 453 (CanLII)
    department head of his school’s math program.

3. Once Mr. Bahia began the GRTW, Insurance Corporation of British Columbia
    (ICBC) determined his entitlement to income replacement benefits and paid them.

4. Mr. Bahia disagrees with ICBC’s entitlement determination. He claims ongoing
    income replacement benefits based on the department head position. He also
    claims compensation for the sick days he used, and interest on any payments ICBC
    owes resulting from this dispute. Mr. Bahia represents himself.

5. ICBC says it correctly determined and paid all income replacement benefits which
    Mr. Bahia is entitled. It also says that Mr. Bahia is not entitled to compensation for
    sick days. An authorized employee represents ICBC.

6. For the reasons that follow, I dismiss Mr. Bahia’s claims.


JURISDICTION AND PROCEDURE

7. The Civil Resolution Tribunal (CRT) has jurisdiction over accident claims brought
    under the Civil Resolution Tribunal Act (CRTA). CRTA section 133(1)(a) gives the
    CRT jurisdiction over the determination of entitlement to accident benefits. These
    are the CRT’s formal written reasons.

8. CRTA section 2 states that the CRT’s mandate is to provide dispute resolution
    services accessibly, quickly, economically, informally, and flexibly. In resolving
    disputes, the CRT must apply principles of law and fairness, and recognize any
    relationships between parties to a dispute that will likely continue after the dispute
    resolution process has ended.




                                             2
9. CRTA section 39 says that the CRT has discretion to decide the format of the
    hearing, including by writing, telephone, videoconferencing, email, or a combination
    of these. I find that I am properly able to assess and weigh the documentary
    evidence and submissions before me. Considering the CRT’s mandate that includes




                                                                                           2025 BCCRT 453 (CanLII)
    proportionality and a speedy resolution of disputes, I find I am able to hear this
    dispute through written submissions.

10. CRTA section 42 says that the CRT may accept as evidence information that it
    considers relevant, necessary, and appropriate, whether or not the information
    would be admissible in court.

Claims not in Dispute Notice

11. In his submissions, Mr. Bahia claims reimbursement for a massage gun and a
    watch. He also asks that ICBC arrange for a brain scan related to his concussion
    symptoms. He did not include these claims in the Dispute Notice. The purpose of
    the Dispute Notice is to define the issues and provide fair notice to ICBC of the
    claims against it. CRT rule 1.19 says the CRT will not issue an amended Dispute
    Notice after the dispute has entered into the tribunal decision process except in
    extraordinary circumstances. Here, I find there are no extraordinary circumstances
    that warrant amending the Dispute Notice.

12. So, I do not address Mr. Bahia’s claims for the massage gun, the watch, or a brain
    scan.

Evidence

13. Mr. Bahia provided evidence from Google AI and other online websites about the
    risks of health symptoms related to his heart condition.

14. In recent CRT decisions2, tribunal members have noted the inherent risks of
    unregulated artificial intelligence tools and declined to rely on evidence from AI-
    generated research. Those decisions note information provided by AI tools is
    unreliable at best. While these decisions are not binding on me, I agree with their



                                             3
    reasoning. So, I give no weight to Mr. Bahia’s AI-produced evidence about the risks
    associated with his heart conditions.


ISSUES




                                                                                             2025 BCCRT 453 (CanLII)
15. The issues in this dispute are:

      a. Whether Mr. Bahia is entitled to replacement or compensation for sick days.

      b. Whether Mr. Bahia is entitled to ongoing income replacement benefits.

      c. Whether Mr. Bahia is entitled to interest for late payments.


BACKGROUND, EVIDENCE, AND ANALYSIS

16. As the applicant in this civil proceeding, Mr. Bahia must prove his claims on a
    balance of probabilities, meaning “more likely than not.” While I have read all of the
    parties’ submitted evidence and arguments, I only refer to those necessary to
    explain my decision.

17. As I note above, on September 27, 2023, Mr. Bahia was rear-ended while driving.
    The impact forced him into the vehicle in front of him. Mr. Bahia’s injuries included
    back pain and neck pain, and he suffered a concussion.

18. At the time of the accident, Mr. Bahia was a senior math secondary school teacher.
    Following the accident, Mr. Bahia took time from work due to his injuries.

Sick Days

19. Mr. Bahia says he has a genetic heart condition, and he will have further heart-
    related conditions as he ages. He says he rarely used his sick days during his
    employment and accumulated them anticipating he will need them in the future to
    deal with his heart condition.




                                             4
20. Mr. Bahia claims the return of, or compensation for, 51 sick days he used due to his
    accident-related injuries.

21. Entitlement to income replacement benefits is determined under Insurance (Vehicle)




                                                                                              2025 BCCRT 453 (CanLII)
    Act Part 10, Division 6. IVA Division 6 provides income replacement benefits to
    people who are unable to work because of an accident. IVA section 122(2) says
    ICBC must not pay a benefit under Part 10 to a person who is entitled to other
    compensation for the same accident, unless the amount paid under Part 10 is
    higher than the other compensation. This means that if a person is entitled to other
    compensation, ICBC may only pay the difference between the other compensation
    and their IVA income replacement benefits.

22. IVA section 122(1) defines “other compensation” as amounts paid or payable for a
    loss or expense similar to one covered under Part 10, including from a “prescribed
    compensation plan or scheme.” Enhanced Accident Benefits Regulation (EABR)
    section 18(2)(c) defines a “prescribed compensation plan or scheme” to include
    compensation from employment or through a collective bargaining agreement.

23. Mr. Bahia does not dispute that his sick days are provided through his employer or
    through collective bargaining. He also does not dispute that his paid sick time
    covered his full wages for the days he was off sick. He says that the legislation is
    unfair because it does not put him in the same position he would be if the accident
    had not happened. He asks for his sick days to be reinstated.

24. It is the role of the court (or the CRT) to apply the law to the circumstances that are
    before it.3 In this dispute, Mr. Bahia claims benefits under a regulation, not damages
    at common law. Damages at common law, or compensatory damages, are
    designed to compensate a person for all of the losses the person suffered or is
    expected to suffer in the future, or to “make the claimant whole.” However, Mr.
    Bahia’s claim for benefits is under the legislated income replacement benefits
    scheme. That legislation limits income replacement benefits to only cover wage loss
    to the extent that it is not otherwise payable to the injured person.




                                             5
25. So, I find under IVA section 122 and EABR section 18, ICBC must not reimburse or
    otherwise pay Mr. Bahia for the use of his sick days. I dismiss his claim.

Income Replacement Benefits




                                                                                             2025 BCCRT 453 (CanLII)
26. In addition to being a senior math teacher, since September 2012 Mr. Bahia was his
    school’s math program department head. The department head position is posted
    every second year, for a 2-year term. Before the accident, Mr. Bahia was
    reappointed to the position for a term running from September 2023 to June 2025.
    He says that after the accident, he could not fulfill the role, and resigned effective
    April 18, 2024. He says ICBC should include the department head allowance when
    calculating income replacement benefits from April 18, 2024 to the end of June
    2025.

27. ICBC does not dispute that Mr. Bahia held the math department head position, but
    says that he did not resign from it due to the accident. It did not pay Mr. Bahia
    income replacement benefits after June 2024.

28. However, I find it does not matter why Mr. Bahia resigned. Mr. Bahia is not entitled
    to further income replacement because his income exceeds the maximum insurable
    income amount under Income Replacement Benefits Regulation (IRBR) section 2.

29. IRBR section 2(3) sets an insured person’s maximum yearly insurable income at
    $100,000 for May 1, 2021 to March 31, 2022. Each year, the maximum income
    increases according to the legislated formula. The cap for April 1, 2023 to March 31,
    2024 was $109,000, and for April 1, 2024 to March 31, 2025 it was $113,000.

30. IRBR section 4 and 17 together provide for a calculation of an insured person’s
    gross yearly employment income (GYEI), which is based on the 52 weeks prior to
    the accident. As Mr. Bahia’s income in the year prior to the accident exceeded the
    2023 income cap, his GYEI for the purpose of determining income replacement
    benefits was limited to the statutory cap of $109,000.




                                              6
31. IVA section 146(1)(c) and IRBR section 11(1)(d) together say that ICBC must
    suspend income replacement benefits if the insured’s current employment income is
    equal to or greater than the GYEI on which the income replacement benefit is
    determined. As Mr. Bahia’s 2024 income exceeded the cap for income replacement




                                                                                             2025 BCCRT 453 (CanLII)
    benefits, I find Mr. Bahia was not entitled to income replacement benefits for the
    loss of the department head allowance.

32. Although Mr. Bahia says he believes he paid for extra insurance to cover his full
    wage loss, ICBC says he did not purchase “top-up” insurance. He did not provide a
    copy of any optional insurance contract which increased his income replacement
    insurance coverage.

33. Mr. Bahia also says that he entered into a verbal and written contract with ICBC to
    provide his full wages after the accident. To support this claim, he provided ICBC’s
    September 18, 2024 email calculating his loss of earnings and eligibility for income
    replacement benefits for May and June 2024. That email says that he can continue
    to submit paystubs during his GRTW, and ICBC will calculate his income
    replacement benefit top up each pay period until “the end of the DH assignment -
    June 2025.”

34. I find that ICBC’s September 18, 2024 email is not a contract to pay income
    replacement benefits to Mr. Bahia in excess of the amount set out in IRBR section
    2(3). The email says ICBC will calculate the benefit. I find it calculated the benefit
    correctly and determined that Mr. Bahia is not eligible for further income
    replacement benefits.

35. So, I dismiss Mr. Bahia’s claim.


FEES AND EXPENSES

36. Under CRTA section 49 and the CRT rules, a successful party is generally entitled
    to the recovery of their CRT fees and dispute-related expenses. As Mr. Bahia was
    not successful, I find that he is not entitled to reimbursement of his CRT fees. Since



                                             7
    ICBC was successful, I find it is entitled to the $25 it paid in CRT fees. Neither party
    claimed dispute-related expenses.


ORDER




                                                                                                   2025 BCCRT 453 (CanLII)
37. I dismiss Mr. Bahia’s claims.

38. Within 21 days of this decision, I order Mr. Bahia to pay ICBC $25 as
    reimbursement for CRT fees.

39. ICBC is entitled to post-judgment interest under the Court Order Interest Act.

40. This is a validated decision and order. Under section 57 and 58 of the CRTA, a
    validated copy of the CRT’s order can be enforced through the Supreme Court of
    British Columbia or the Provincial Court of British Columbia if it is under $35,000.
    Once filed, a CRT order has the same force and effect as a court order.




                                                             Deanna Rivers, Tribunal Member




1 Amendment note: Paragraph 4 was amended to correct an accidental typographical error under the

authority of Civil Resolution Tribunal Act section 64(a).
2 For example, Yang v. Gibbs (dba D & G Cedar Fencing), 2024 BCCRT 613, SQBox Solutions Ltd. v.

Oak, 2025 BCCRT 408.
3 Wunderlich v. Kamloops (City), 2025 BCSC 555.




                                                 8
