Matter of Gabriel H. (N.Y. App. Div. 2024)
 Court: New York Supreme Court, Appellate Division

 Citation: 2024 NY Slip Op 03588

 Docket Number: 187 CAF 23-01211

 Date Decided: July 3, 2024


Matter of Gabriel H. 2024 NY Slip Op 03588 Decided on July 3, 2024 Appellate Division, Fourth Department
Published by New York State Law Reporting Bureau pursuant to Judiciary Law § 431. This opinion is
uncorrected and subject to revision before publication in the Official Reports.

Decided on July 3, 2024 SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK Appellate Division, Fourth Judicial
Department
PRESENT: SMITH, J.P., CURRAN, OGDEN, GREENWOOD, AND KEANE, JJ.
187 CAF 23-01211

[*1]IN THE MATTER OF GABRIEL H. ERIE COUNTY DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SERVICES, PETITIONER-
RESPONDENT; DANIEL K., RESPONDENT-APPELLANT. (APPEAL NO. 1.)




NICHOLAS T. TEXIDO, WEST SENECA, FOR RESPONDENT-APPELLANT.

BENJAMIN MANNION, BUFFALO, FOR PETITIONER-RESPONDENT.

DAVID J. PAJAK, ALDEN, ATTORNEY FOR THE CHILD.




Appeal from an order of the Family Court, Erie County (Sharon M. LoVallo, J.), entered December 15, 2022, in a
proceeding pursuant to Family Court Act article 10. The order, inter alia, determined that respondent
derivatively abused the subject child.

It is hereby ORDERED that the order so appealed from is affirmed without costs.
  We use cookies to improve the experience of our website. By continuing to use our
  website, you consent to the use of cookies. To understand more about how we use        Accept & Continue
  cookies, please see our Privacy Policy.
Memorandum: In these proceedings pursuant to Family Court Act article 10, respondent appeals in appeal No. 2
from an order of fact-finding and disposition that, inter alia, determined that he abused the daughter of his
girlfriend (mother) and, in appeal No. 1, he appeals from an order of fact-finding and disposition that, inter alia,
determined that he derivatively abused the mother's son. The evidence against respondent at the fact-finding
hearing consisted chiefly of videos depicting him sexually abusing the daughter in the living room of a house,
and respondent contends with respect to both appeals that Family Court improperly admitted those videos in
evidence. Although we disagree with petitioner that respondent failed to preserve that contention for our review,
we nevertheless reject respondent's contention.

The videos were discovered by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) during an unrelated investigation in
late January 2022 into the trading of child pornography. The FBI executed a search warrant upon a person
(suspect) who was a subject of their investigation. The suspect admitted to an FBI special agent that he had been
hacking into security web cameras and that, in 2019, he had hacked into a security camera where he observed
what he believed was an adult male sexually abusing a teenage girl. The FBI obtained from the suspect's
computer three videos and details of the security camera login information, including an email address. Through
the FBI's investigative work, together with the assistance of the New York State Police, it was determined that
the videos came from a camera in a house where respondent resided with the mother and the children who are
the subject of these proceedings. The FBI agent explained how he copied the videos from the suspect's computer
onto a DVD, and he testified that the videos on the DVD that was admitted in evidence at the fact-finding
hearing were true and accurate copies of the videos he viewed on the suspect's computer. He testified that he did
not make any observations that led him to believe that the video footage had been tampered with or altered in
any way. The videos were date-stamped from May, June, and July 2019. A detective with the State Police
testified that he showed screenshots of the videos to the mother, who identified the female in one image as her
daughter and the male in another as respondent, her live-in boyfriend. Upon entering the mother's residence,
the detective observed cameras in the house, including in the living room, and he testified that the living room
and its furnishings matched what was shown in the videos.

Respondent contends that petitioner failed to authenticate the videos through the [*2]testimony of a person who
witnessed the events, the maker of the videos, or someone with sufficient knowledge of the surveillance system
to show that it accurately recorded the events. Respondent further contends that petitioner failed to establish
that the videos were not fabricated by the suspect. It is well settled that the admissibility of video evidence rests
within the sound discretion of the trial court so long as a sufficient foundation for its admissibility has been
proffered (see People v Patterson, 93 NY2d 80, 84 [1999]). "[A]uthenticity is established by proof that the
offered evidence is genuine and that there has been no tampering with it" (People v McGee, 49 NY2d 48, 59
[1979], cert denied 446 US 942 [1980]; see People v Price, 29 NY3d 472, 476 [2017]). A video "may be
authenticated by the testimony of a witness to the recorded events or of an operator or installer or maintainer of
the equipment that the video[ ] accurately represents the subject matter depicted" (Patterson, 93 NY2d at 84). It
may also be authenticated, however, by "[t]estimony, expert or otherwise . . . [to] establish that a video[ ] 'truly
and accurately represents what was before the camera' " (id.). "[T]he foundation necessary to establish
[authenticity] may differ according to the nature of the evidence sought to be admitted" (People v Goldman, 35
NY3d 582, 595 [2020] [internal quotation marks omitted]).

WeWe use with
   agree cookies
              theto improve
                  court that the
                              theexperience of sufficiently
                                  videos were  our website.authenticated
                                                            By continuing to
                                                                          anduse our"any alleged uncertainty went to
                                                                               that
  website, you consent to the use of cookies. To understand more about how we use           Accept & Continue
the weight to be accorded the evidence rather than its admissibility" (People v Houston, 181 AD3d 477, 478 [1st
  cookies, please see our Privacy Policy.
Dept 2020], lv denied 35 NY3d 1027 [2020] [internal quotation marks omitted]). The testimony of the special
agent and detective authenticated the videos through circumstantial evidence of their "appearance, contents,
substance, internal patterns, and other distinctive characteristics" (People v Franzese, 154 AD3d 706, 707 [2d
Dept 2017], lv denied 30 NY3d 1105 [2018]; see Guide to NY Evid rule 9.05 [6], Methods of Authentication and
Identification; see also People v Jordan, 181 AD3d 1248, 1249-1250 [4th Dept 2020], lv denied 35 NY3d 1067
[2020]; see generally Goldman, 35 NY3d at 595-596). The testimony at the hearing established that the videos
depicted a living room of the home where the mother, her children, and respondent lived. The detective testified
that the mother identified her daughter and respondent in screenshots taken from the videos; that he observed
cameras in the house, including in the living room; and that he observed that the living room and its furnishings
matched what was shown in the videos. In other words, there were "distinctive identifying characteristics" in the
videos themselves (Goldman, 35 NY3d at 595). There was also the "significant fact" that respondent "did not
dispute that he was the individual who appeared in the video[s]" (id.). In addition, the special agent testified that
he primarily investigated child pornography and performed digital forensic work, and he saw no signs of
alteration or tampering with the videos. We therefore conclude that petitioner established that the videos
"accurately represent[ed] the subject matter depicted" (id. [internal quotation marks omitted]), and we conclude
that the court acted within its "founded discretion" (Patterson, 93 NY2d at 84) in admitting them in evidence.

Contrary to respondent's further contention in appeal No. 2, there is a sound and substantial basis in the record
supporting the court's determination that he abused the daughter (see Matter of Skyler D. [Joseph D.], 185 AD3d
1515, 1516 [4th Dept 2020]; see generally Matter of Philip M., 82 NY2d 238, 243-244 [1993]). Respondent does
not dispute that the acts shown on the videos constitute sex offenses (see Family Ct Act § 1012 [e] [iii]), but he
contends that the videos should be given little to no weight because they could be "deepfakes." The court
afforded the videos great weight based on clear evidence of their reliability, including that the room depicted in
the videos was the same room that was shown on photographs taken by the police when they searched the home
where respondent, the mother, and her children lived. As the court noted, the same couch, afghan, end table, and
lamp were all visible in the videos and photographs. Other items the police recovered from the home were also
seen in the videos. In addition, respondent, the mother, and the children were all easily identifiable in the videos,
and we agree with the court's determination that the "actions, dialog, and behavior shown in the videos show no
indication of any tampering." There were no visible cuts or edits, or jumps in the time stamps on the videos.

We reject respondent's further contention in appeal No. 1 that the finding of derivative abuse with respect to the
son is not supported by a preponderance of the evidence (see Skyler D., 185 AD3d at 1517). The abuse of the
daughter occurred in the living room of the house, which is easily accessible to anyone in the house. The son was
depicted in one video just 15 minutes before respondent abused the daughter. We conclude that the court
properly determined that the son is an abused child "inasmuch as the abuse of [the daughter] 'is so closely
connected with the [*3]care of [the son] as to indicate that [the son] is equally at risk' " (Matter of Alyssa C.M., 17
AD3d 1023, 1024 [4th Dept 2005], lv denied 5 NY3d 706 [2005]; see Matter of Markeith G. [Deon W.], 152
AD3d 424, 425 [1st Dept 2017]; see generally Matter of Marino S., 100 NY2d 361, 374 [2003], cert denied 540
US 1059 [2003]).

Respondent's contention in appeal No. 2 regarding the order of protection issued against him in favor of the
daughter is moot inasmuch as that order has been vacated. Respondent's further contention in appeal No. 1 that
the court erred in including a certain provision with respect to the order of protection issued against him in favor
of We
   the use
       son cookies to improve
           is not preserved   the
                            for   experience
                                our          of our
                                    review (see     website.
                                                Matter       By continuing
                                                       of Ariel            to use our W.], 89 AD3d 1438, 1438 [4th
                                                                 C.W.-H. [Christine
  website, you consent to the use of cookies. To understand more about how we use             Accept & Continue
Dept 2011]). We decline to address that contention in the interest of justice (see id.).
  cookies, please see our Privacy Policy.
We have considered respondent's remaining contentions and conclude that they do not require modification or
reversal of the orders.

All concur except Curran and Ogden, JJ., who dissent and vote to reverse in accordance with the following
memorandum: We respectfully dissent and would reverse the orders and dismiss the petitions at the center of
these two appeals because we conclude, contrary to the majority, that Family Court erred in admitting in
evidence home surveillance videos depicting respondent sexually abusing the daughter of his girlfriend
(mother). The videos formed the primary basis for the determinations that respondent abused the daughter and
derivatively abused the mother's son. A joint fact-finding hearing was held with respect to the petitions against
respondent and the mother, who herself was ultimately found—based on the same essential evidence—to have
abused the daughter and derivatively abused the son because she knew or should have known about
respondent's sexual abuse but did nothing to stop it. The mother separately appealed from the orders of fact-
finding and disposition determining that she abused the daughter and derivatively abused the son, and this
Court affirmed the orders in those appeals (Matter of Mekayla S. [Melanie H.] [appeal No. 1], — AD3d &mdash,
— [July 3, 2024] [4th Dept 2024]; Matter of Gabriel H. [Melanie H.] [appeal No. 2], — AD3d &mdash, — [July 3,
2024] [4th Dept 2024] [decided herewith]).

Here, in concluding that the court erred in admitting in evidence the videos with respect to respondent's appeals,
we agree with and adopt the rationale contained in the dissent of Presiding Justice Whalen in the mother's
appeals concluding that, during the joint fact-finding hearing, petitioner did not sufficiently authenticate the
videos inasmuch as there was no testimony, expert or otherwise establishing that the videos truly and accurately
represented what was before the camera (see Mekayla S., — AD3d at — [Whalen, P.J., dissenting]; see People v
Patterson, 93 NY2d 80, 84 [1999]; Torres v Hickman, 162 AD3d 821, 823 [2d Dept 2018]). That rationale applies
with equal force here, in respondent's appeals, inasmuch as the abuse and derivative abuse determinations with
respect to both the mother's appeals and respondent's appeals were based on identical evidence. Specifically, as
noted in the dissent in the mother's appeals, petitioner did not offer any testimony from any person who
witnessed the events depicted in the videos or who had controlled or maintained the system that recorded the
videos. Instead, petitioner relied largely on the testimony of an agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation
(FBI) who—more than two years after the videos were recorded—transferred the videos from the computer of an
individual who was a subject of an FBI investigation (suspect). The suspect had obtained the videos by hacking
into a security camera at the house respondent shared with the mother and the subject children. We agree with
the dissent in the mother's appeals that the FBI agent's testimony was insufficient, by itself, to authenticate the
videos because he did not have any personal knowledge of the creation of the videos or how they were obtained
by the suspect, nor did his testimony establish how his experience "perform[ing] digital forensic work" might
have "trained him to identify alterations to [the] videos" or provide any basis for his belief that the videos had
not been edited or altered (Mekayla S., — AD3d at — [Whalen, P.J., dissenting]).

In light of our conclusion that petitioner did not provide a sufficient legal foundation (see Patterson, 93 NY2d at
85), we conclude that the videos should not have been admitted in evidence. Without the videos, there is no
evidence to sustain the petitions and, consequently, we would reverse the order in each appeal and dismiss the
petitions.

Entered:
  We useJuly  3, to
          cookies2024
                    improve the experience of our website. By continuing to use our
  website, you consent to the use of cookies. To understand more about how we use            Accept & Continue
Ann Dillonplease
  cookies,  Flynn see our Privacy Policy.
Clerk of the Court




Some case metadata and case summaries were written with the help of AI, which can produce inaccuracies. You should read the
full case before relying on it for legal research purposes.




  We use cookies to improve the experience of our website. By continuing to use our
  website, you consent to the use of cookies. To understand more about how we use                 Accept & Continue
  cookies, please see our Privacy Policy.
