                                                          Date Issued: June 27, 2024




                                                                                        2024 BCCRT 613 (CanLII)
                                                               File: SC-2023-005421

                                                                  Type: Small Claims


                              Civil Resolution Tribunal

      Indexed as: Yang v. Gibbs (dba D & G Cedar Fencing), 2024 BCCRT 613


  BETWEEN:


            ZHONGXUN YANG and QIANXIN MO

                                                                    APPLICANTS


  AND:


            DARYL GIBBS (Doing Business As D & G CEDAR FENCING)

                                                                   RESPONDENT



                            REASONS FOR DECISION


Tribunal Member:                                                       Alison Wake


INTRODUCTION

1. The applicants, Zhongxun Yang and Qianxin Mo, hired the respondent, Daryl Gibbs
   (doing business as D & G Cedar Fencing), to repair their fence. The applicants say
   they sent a $4,300 deposit for the fence by e-transfer as instructed by Mr. Gibbs.
   When Mr. Gibbs denied receiving the e-transfer, the applicants ultimately paid Mr.
   Gibbs for the fence by cheque. The applicants say that Mr. Gibbs has been unjustly
    enriched by the duplicate payments, and they claim $4,300 as a refund for the alleged
    overpayment.

2. Mr. Gibbs denies receiving the e-transfer from the applicants. He says he only




                                                                                                  2024 BCCRT 613 (CanLII)
    received the cheque payment. So, Mr. Gibbs asks me to dismiss this dispute.

3. Mr. Yang represents the applicants. Mr. Gibbs is self-represented.

4. For the following reasons, I dismiss the applicants’ claims.


JURISDICTION AND PROCEDURE

5. These are the formal written reasons of the Civil Resolution Tribunal (CRT). The CRT
    has jurisdiction over small claims brought under section 118 of the Civil Resolution
    Tribunal Act (CRTA). CRTA section 2 says that the CRT’s mandate is to provide
    dispute resolution services accessibly, quickly, economically, informally, and flexibly.

6. CRTA section 39 says the CRT has discretion to decide the format of the hearing,
    including by writing, telephone, videoconferencing, email, or a combination of these.
    Although neither party requested an oral hearing, I considered whether one would be
    appropriate given the credibility issues involved in this dispute. While credibility issues
    can, in some cases, be resolved by an oral hearing, the advantages of an oral hearing
    must be weighed against the CRT’s mandate for speedy, economical and
    proportionate dispute resolution. Here, the central issue is whether Mr. Gibbs
    received the e-transfer as the applicants allege. The parties have addressed this
    issue in their written submissions and evidence. Given this, and the relatively small
    amount involved, I decided that the benefit of an oral hearing does not outweigh the
    efficiency of a hearing by written submissions. So, I decided this dispute on the written
    material before me.

7. CRTA section 42 says the CRT may accept as evidence information that it considers
    relevant, necessary and appropriate, whether or not the information would be
    admissible in court.




                                              2
ISSUE

8. The issue in this dispute is whether Mr. Gibbs received the applicants’ $4,300 e-
    transfer and if so, whether he must refund it to them.




                                                                                             2024 BCCRT 613 (CanLII)
EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS

9. In this civil proceeding, the applicants must prove their claims on a balance of
    probabilities, meaning more likely than not. While I have considered all the parties’
    evidence and submissions, I only refer to what is necessary to explain my decision.

10. The background facts are undisputed. On May 1, 2023, Mr. Yang emailed Mr. Gibbs
    and requested a quote for repairing or replacing some broken fence panels and posts
    in the applicants’ yard. Mr. Gibbs emailed Mr. Yang a quote on May 5. The quote
    itself is not in evidence, but the emails show that Mr. Yang agreed to it and asked if
    Mr. Gibbs accepted transfer or cheque for payment.

11. Later the same day, Mr. Yang emailed Mr. Gibbs again asking how to pay. Mr. Yang
    says that Mr. Gibbs responded the next day, May 6, and instructed him to e-transfer
    $4,300 to a Gmail address. This email is in evidence, and shows that it was sent by
    Mr. Gibbs’ business email address, which is a Hotmail address. The Gmail address
    in the body of the email does not include Mr. Gibbs’ name or business name.

12. The applicants say that Qianxin Mo e-transferred $4,300 to the Gmail address on
    May 6. They provided a screenshot of the e-transfer confirmation in evidence.

13. On May 6, Mr. Yang emailed Mr. Gibbs at the Hotmail address and advised that
    Qianxin Mo had transferred $4,300. A May 8 response from the Hotmail address says
    “Yes, we received the payment. Thank you.”

14. Mr. Gibbs denies receiving the e-transfer, and denies sending the email providing the
    Gmail address to the applicants for payment. In support of this, Mr. Gibbs provided a
    screenshot of his email account’s “sent” folder, which does not show any sent emails
    on May 6. Mr. Gibbs also provided his business bank account statements for April



                                            3
    and May 2023, which do not show any deposits on May 6. The statements show an
    ATM deposit of $4,300 on May 11, which Mr. Gibbs says is from the cheque that the
    applicants later provided.




                                                                                               2024 BCCRT 613 (CanLII)
15. I find neither of these documents is determinative about whether Mr. Gibbs received
    the e-transfer. I say this because Mr. Gibbs could have deleted an email from his sent
    folder, and could have deposited the e-transfer into a different account. However, I
    acknowledge that it would be difficult for Mr. Gibbs to entirely disprove receiving an
    e-transfer. With this in mind, I find this evidence persuasive and consistent with Mr.
    Gibbs’ description of the events.

16. As noted, the applicants bear the burden of proving their claims on a balance of
    probabilities. The applicants say that Mr. Gibbs has been unjustly enriched by the
    duplicate payments. To prove unjust enrichment, the applicants must show that a)
    Mr. Gibbs was enriched, b) the applicants suffered a corresponding loss, and c) there
    was no “juristic reason” or valid basis for the enrichment.1

17. Here, I find the applicants have not proven that Mr. Gibbs was enriched. In other
    words, I find they have not proven that Mr. Gibbs received the e-transfer. Mr. Gibbs
    denies receiving it, and I find the applicants’ own conduct after sending the e-transfer
    shows that they accepted that Mr. Gibbs likely did not receive it. For example, in a
    May 9 text message to Mr. Gibbs, Mr. Yang said that he had contacted his bank and
    the e-transfer would be reported to police for investigation. In the message, Mr. Yang
    said “Meanwhile, just a reminder that your email might be hacked and accessed by
    someone else. You need to change the password to prevent this happening again to
    the other customers.” Mr. Yang also asked for Mr. Gibbs’ permission to share the
    email threads with the bank and the police for investigation.

18. The applicants also provided an email that Mr. Yang sent to the Gmail address on
    May 10. He addressed the recipient as “Debra”, which matches the first name of the
    e-transfer confirmation. In the email, Mr. Yang advised that he believed he had been


1 Moore v. Sweet, 2018 SCC 52.




                                             4
    given the wrong email address for the e-transfer. He asked the recipient to send the
    money back, and said that they could keep $300 if they returned $4,000.

19. I find this evidence shows that in the days following the e-transfer, the applicants




                                                                                            2024 BCCRT 613 (CanLII)
    accepted Mr. Gibbs’ explanation that he had not received it. However, the applicants
    say that they then conducted an analysis which showed that Mr. Gibbs’ email
    attaching the quote and the email requesting e-transfer payment originated from the
    same source. So, I infer they argue that Mr. Gibbs sent the email requesting the e-
    transfer payment to the Gmail address.

20. In support of this, the applicants provided a January 26, 2024 interaction with
    ChatGPT, an artificial intelligence tool. The interaction shows that a user labeled
    “Anonymous” uploaded Mr. Gibbs’ quote email and the email requesting the e-
    transfer payment, and instructed ChatGPT to check if the emails were sent from the
    same device.

21. The response from ChatGPT says that based on the emails’ “headers”, including the
    originating IP addresses and the structure of the “Message ID” headers, it is highly
    likely that the two emails were sent from the same device or at least the same local
    network. However, it notes that it is not possible to state this without absolute
    certainty.

22. The BC Supreme Court recently discussed the risks of relying on generative artificial
    intelligence tools such as ChatGPT in a case in which ChatGPT generated references
    to non-existent court decisions.2 The court noted that there is an express warning on
    the ChatGPT website that the output could be inaccurate, and that using ChatGPT is
    not a substitute for professional advice. Similarly, the Ontario Superior Court of
    Justice has noted the inherent risks of unregulated artificial intelligence tools and
    declined to rely on ChatGPT-generated research.3 Based on these decisions and
    absent any evidence to the contrary, I find information provided by ChatGPT is



2 Zhang v. Chen, 2024 BCSC 285.
3 Floryan v. Luke et al., 2023 ONSC 5108.




                                             5
    unreliable at best. So, I give no weight to the applicants’ ChatGPT evidence about
    the origin of the emails they received.

23. The applicants also say that Mr. Yang’s educational and professional background




                                                                                              2024 BCCRT 613 (CanLII)
    make him capable of detecting and preventing digital fraud. They say that Mr. Yang
    verified the authenticity of the email requesting the e-transfer by thoroughly checking
    the email headers and scrutinizing the email content before sending payment. CRT
    Rule 8.3(7) says that a party generally cannot act as their own expert in a CRT dispute
    because they lack neutrality, so I do not accept Mr. Yang’s submissions as expert
    evidence of the emails’ origin. In any event, even if the applicants took reasonable
    precautions before sending the e-transfer, this does not mean that Mr. Gibbs received
    the e-transfer.

24. In summary, I find the applicants have not proven on a balance of probabilities that
    Mr. Gibbs was enriched by the $4,300 e-transfer. So, I find their claim for unjust
    enrichment must fail.

25. I also considered whether the applicants may recover the e-transfer under the
    doctrine of mistake of fact. An applicant may recover money that they have paid under
    an honest mistake of fact.4 However, this doctrine requires that the mistake must be
    between the person paying the money and the person receiving it. For the reasons
    explained above, I find the applicants have not proven that Mr. Gibbs received the
    $4,300 e-transfer. So, I find mistake of fact does not apply in these circumstances. I
    dismiss the applicants’ claim for reimbursement of the $4,300 e-transfer.

26. Under CRTA section 49 and the CRT Rules, the CRT will generally order an
    unsuccessful party to reimburse a successful party for CRT fees and reasonable
    dispute-related expenses. As the applicants were unsuccessful, I dismiss their claim
    for CRT fees. Mr. Gibbs did not pay CRT fees, and none of the parties claimed
    dispute-related expenses, so I make no order for them.




4 Dyson et al. v. Moser, 2003 BCSC 1720.




                                              6
ORDER

27. I dismiss the applicants’ claims and this dispute.




                                                                                        2024 BCCRT 613 (CanLII)
                                                         Alison Wake, Tribunal Member




                                             7
