                      SUPERIOR COURT, STATE OF CALIFORNIA
                             COUNTY OF SANTA CLARA
                                      Department 6
                        Honorable Evette D. Pennypacker, Presiding
                                    David Criswell, Courtroom Clerk
                                191 North First Street, San Jose, CA 95113
                                       Telephone: (408) 882-2160

                          DATE: APRIL 27, 2023 TIME: 9:00 A.M.

TO REQUEST ORAL ARGUMENT: Before 4:00 PM today you must notify the:
       (1) Court by calling (408) 808-6856 and
       (2) Other side by phone or email that you plan to appear at the hearing to contest the ruling
If you do not notify the other side and/or the Court, the Court will not hear oral argument and will adopt the
tentative. (California Rule of Court 3.1308(a)(1) and Local Rule 8.E.)

IN PERSON HEARINGS: The Court strongly prefers in person appearances for contested law and motion
matters. We are open and look forward to seeing you in person again.


VIRTUAL HEARINGS: Whenever possible, please use video when appearing for your hearing virtually
through Microsoft Teams. To attend virtually, click or copy and paste this link into your internet browser, and
scroll down to Department 6: https://www.scscourt.org/general_info/ra_teams/video_hearings_teams.shtml


TO HAVE YOUR HEARING REPORTED: The Court does not provide official court reporters. If you want a
court reporter to report your hearing, you must submit the appropriate form, which can be found here:
https://www.scscourt.org/general_info/court_reporters.shtml
    LINE #      CASE #             CASE TITLE                                   RULING
LINE 1       20CV368784   The National Collection           Parties are ordered to appear for the hearing on
                          Agency Inc vs RICK                order of examination.
                          PROVENZANO BUILDERS,
                          INC.
LINE 2       22CV404254   Antonio Reza vs Santa Clara       Defendants’ special motion to strike the Complaint
                          University et al                  is GRANTED. Please scroll down to Line 2 for full
                                                            tentative opinion. Court to prepare formal order.

LINE 3       22CV406803   Strike Cupertino VFP, LLC, l      Defendant’s Demurrer to the First Cause of Action
                          vs Vallco Property Owner,         for Specific Performance is OVERRULED.
                          LLC
                                                            Please scroll down to Line 3 for full tentative
                                                            opinion. Court to prepare formal order.
LINE 4       19CV346663   Sz Huang et al vs Tesla Inc. et   Plaintiffs’ Motion to Compel Written Discovery,
                          al                                Elon Musk’s Deposition and for Sanctions is
                                                            GRANTED, IN PART. Please scroll down to
                                                            Line 4 for full tentative opinion. Court to prepare
                                                            formal order.
LINE 5       19CV346663   Sz Huang et al vs Tesla Inc. et   The Court has no Opposition to Plaintiffs’ Motion
                          al                                to Compel Person Most Qualified Deposition. It
                                                            also does not appear to the Court that as of the
                                                            time the motion was filed the Parties had
                                                            completed their meet and confer. Accordingly, the
                                                            Court requests that the Parties appear at the
                                                            hearing to provide an update regarding this Motion
                                                            to Compel.




                                                 2
Calendar Lines 4 and 5
Case Name: Sz Huang et al v. Tesla, Inc. et. al.
Case No.: 19CV346663

        Before the Court is Plaintiffs’ Motion to Compel Further Responses to Requests for Admission
(set 2 and 3), Request for Admission as to Genuineness of Documents (Set 3), Form Interrogatory No.
71.1, Special Interrogatories (Set 3, 4 and 5), Request for Production (Set 5 and 6), the Deposition of
Elon Musk and for Sanctions. Pursuant to California Rule of Court 3.1308, the Court issues its tentative
ruling as follows:

I.     Factual Background

        This is a product liability action. Plaintiffs are the wife and children of Walter Huang who
suffered a fatal crash while driving his Tesla Model X in 2018. Mr. Huang added Autopilot when he
purchased his Tesla, but he did not purchase the “Full Driving Capability Package.” According to Tesla,
Autopilot provides numerous warnings and instructions to its users, both in the manual and in the car
while the Tesla is in use, making clear that drivers need to keep their hands on the wheel and “be
prepared to take over at any time” even while Autopilot is engaged. Tesla also argues that consumers
are made aware of Autopilot’s limitations in areas where, for example, the lanes are unclear, the light is
low or the Tesla’s cameras are obstructed in some way.

         Mr. Huang’s crash occurred on March 23, 2018, approximately four months after he purchased
his Tesla Model X. He was driving his regular morning route when he approached the junction of 101
South and State Route 85 where a high-occupancy vehicle (HOV) lane splits off southbound 101 to the
left to go up a ramp. A concrete median eventually begins in the middle of the two lanes, which middle
is called a “gore.” Mr. Huang apparently had experienced the Tesla veering towards this gore in his
morning route, and complained of this to others, including his wife. On the morning of March 23, 2018,
Mr. Huang’s Tesla Model X veered toward the gore point, crashing into the median. Mr. Huang was
pronounced dead at the scene.

       According to Tesla, Mr. Huang’s hands were not detected on the wheel multiple times during the
19 minutes leading up to the crash, Autopilot issued two visual and one audible alert for hands-off
driving, Mr. Huang’s hands were not on the wheel for the final six seconds before the crash, and Mr.
Huang was playing the video game Three Kingdoms on his phone at the time of the crash.

       Relevant to this motion, Plaintiffs claim Mr. Musk made the following public statements
concerning Autopilot:

         In June 2014: “I’m confident that—in less than a year—you’ll be able to go from
         onramp to highway exit without touching any controls.”

         In October 2014: “But what [Tesla is] doing is. . .incorporating a lot of active safety
         features so that the car will stay in its lane, will automatically brake, will maintain a
         distance to other cars, will avoid like highway barriers and other obstacles.”




                                                    22
In March 2015: Mr. Musk announced Tesla would be adding “autosteering” to its
vehicles, stating “Our main test route that we’re evaluating is the San Francisco to
Seattle route, and we’re now almost able to travel all the way from San Francisco to
Seattle without the driver touching any controls at all.” And, when asked if
customers would be required to periodically put their hands on the wheel, Mr. Musk
replied “We don’t have that in mind. . .I think like actually some of the manufacturers
have it kind of backwards. It’s like if you take your hands off the wheel for a certain
period of time, the auto steering stops working. But I mean what if somebody’s
distracted or conceivably fell asleep or something, then you don’t want to have the
car not steer. That seems backwards.”

In January 2016: Tesla added a webpage entitled “tesla 7.0 Autopilot: a perfect
commuter feature”, which website stated “the new Autosteer feature set a milestone
in automotive development. It is the first time a serial production car can drive safely
on its own on freeways.” That same month, Musk referred to Autosteer as
“autonomous mode” and said “I believe that it is probably better than human at this
point in highway driving or certainly will be as the fleet learning gets more and more
sophisticated. That’s actually been my observation when I’ve been testing the cars,
that it’s certainly better than human at staying in the center of the lane compared to
other cars on the road. . .I’m actually not aware of any cases where the autopilot
caused an accident.. . .In fact, even the cases where people did pretty crazy things like
they set the car in autonomous mode and then got into the backseat and that kind of
thing.”

In June 2016: “I really consider autonomous driving a solved problem. I think we
are less than two years away from complete autonomy, safer than humans, but
regulations should take at least another year. . .On highways, particularly highways
that have barriers so that you don’t have pedestrians. That’s also relatively easy. A
Model S and Model X, at this point, can drive autonomously with greater safety than
a person. Right now.”

July 20, 2016: Mr. Musk released a blog post entitled “Master Plan, Part Deux” in
which he explained that Autopilot “is not beta software in any normal sense of the
word. . . It is called beta in order to decrease complacency and indicate that it will
continue to improve. . . .”

September 11, 2016: Mr. Musk published a blog post entitled “Upgrading Autopilot:
Seeing the World in Radar”, representing that Teslas equipped with the most recently
released software “should almost always hit the brakes correctly even if a UFO were
to land on the freeway in zero visibility conditions.” He further stated “I beta tested—
true beta test, alpha test really—the software personally. I feel strongly in using
myself and make sure it’s good before anyone else uses it. I used it on an alpha basis
to confirm and it’s good.”

October 2016: A promotional video Plaintiffs claim Mr. Musk finalized the details
for states “The person in the driver’s seat is only there for legal reasons. He is not


                                           23
         doing anything. The car is driving itself.” The video, according to Plaintiffs, then
         shows a Tesla Model X obeying traffic lights and signs and reacting to pedestrians,
         seemingly displaying a technology that, according to Plaintiffs, multiple Tesla
         engineers admit did not exist at the time.

         November 2017: “I think it’s really quite unequivocal that Autopilot improves safety.
         . . And I think it would be morally wrong to withhold functionalities that improve
         safety simply in order to avoid criticisms or for fear of being involved in lawsuits.”

         According to Plaintiffs, some of the above statements were recorded in interviews and test drives
with journalists, including Bloomberg and Gayle King, and other statements were made during investor
calls, in tweets and blogs and in Ted Talks.

II.    Procedural Background

       Plaintiffs filed this action on April 26, 2019 asserting claims against Tesla for
Negligence/Wrongful Death, Strict Liability, Negligence (post-sale), and Survival. The parties have
engaged in extensive discovery since, including hundreds of hours of depositions, voluminous document
production and third party discovery, and hundreds of written discovery requests.

        On February 23, 2023, the Court heard argument regarding Plaintiffs’ Motion to Compel Tesla’s
further responses to Requests for Admission (Set Four), Requests for Production of Documents (Set 6),
Form Interrogatories (Set 3), and Special Interrogatories (Set 3) all of which focused on Mr. Musk’s
public statements, Plaintiff’s Motion to Compel Mr. Musk’s deposition, and Tesla’s Motion for
Protective Order Regarding Mr. Musk’s deposition. The Court issued an order dated March 10, 2023,
with the following rulings:

               [T]he Court GRANTS Plaintiffs’ motion to compel further responses to
           Requests for Admissions, except for No. 36, which the Court finds not to be
           relevant to any issue in the case. (Tesla already agreed to supplement Nos.
           16, 37, 42, 43, 44, 45, and 46.)

               The Court GRANTS Plaintiffs’ motion to compel further responses to
           Form Interrogatory No. 17.1 (which relates to Tesla’s responses to the
           Requests for Admission), Special Interrogatory Nos. 46-48, and Request for
           Production No. 214. If Tesla’s current response to Special Interrogatory No.
           46 is the only fact in Tesla’s possession, custody and control responsive to
           Interrogatory No. 46, then Tesla must so state. Similarly, if the single
           document referenced in response to Tesla’s response to Request for
           Production 214 is the only responsive document in Tesla’s possession,
           custody or control, then it must so state in its written response. In addition, if
           Tesla has responsive privileged, work product documents created before this
           lawsuit was filed, it must place them on a privilege log.




                                                    24
              Tesla is ordered to serve the supplemental discovery outlined herein by
           March 31, 2023 and to respond to any further Requests for Admissions or
           Special Interrogatories permitted herein according to Code.

               The Court GRANTS Tesla’s motion for protective order, pending its
           responses to the additional written discovery ordered herein. The Court sets a
           further hearing regarding the present motion for April 27, 2023 at 9am in
           Department 6.

        Plaintiff has now filed a motion to compel the deposition of Mr. Musk and for issue sanctions
related to the discovery ordered (and permitted) by the Court on March 10, 2023.

III.   Relevant Discovery Standards

        Discovery is generally permitted “regarding any matter, not privileged, that is relevant to the
subject matter involved in the pending action or to the determination of any motion made in that action,
if the matter either is itself admissible in evidence or appears reasonably calculated to lead to the
discovery of admissible evidence.” (Cal. Code Civ. Pro. § 2017.010.) Everything that is relevant to the
subject matter is presumed to be discoverable. (Id.) The Discovery Act further declares that “the court
shall limit the scope of discovery” if it determines that the burden, expense, or intrusiveness of that
discovery “clearly outweighs the likelihood that the information sought will lead to the discovery of
admissible evidence.” (Cal. Code Civ. Pro. § 2017.020(a); Greyhound Corp. v. Superior Court (1961)
56 C.2d 355, 383-385.) The California Supreme Court teaches in Greyhound that the judge exercising
discretion to limit discovery should construe disputed facts liberally in favor of discovery; reject
objections such as hearsay that only apply at trial; permit fishing expeditions (within limits), avoid
extending limitations on discovery, such as privileges; and, whenever possible, impose only partial
limitations rather than denying discovery entirely. (Greyhound Corp. v. Superior Court (1961) 56 C.2d
355, 383-385; see also Tylo v. Superior Court (1997) 55 Cal.App.4th 1379, 1386.)

       Requests for admissions are different than other discovery devices; they are designed to compel
admission as to all matters that cannot reasonably be controverted in order to expedite trial by reducing
the number of triable issues that must be adjudicated. (City of Glendale v. Marcus Cable Assoc., LLC
(2015) 235 Cal.App.4th 344, 352; Doe v. Los Angeles County Dep’t of Children & family Servs. (2019)
37 Cal.App.5th 675, 690; Orange County Water Dist. v. The Arnold Eng’g Co. (2018) 31 Cal.App.5th 96,
119.) However, requests for admission are not restricted to just facts and documents. They are also
applicable to conclusions, opinions, and legal questions. (City of Glendale v. Marcus Cable Assoc., LLC
(2015) 235 Cal.App.4th 344.) A party to a civil action that denies a pretrial request for admission
without a reasonable basis can be ordered to pay to the propounding party the reasonable expenses
incurred, including attorney’s fees and costs, in proving the matter covered by the request. (See Cal.
Code Civ. Pro. §2033.420(a); Spahn v. Richards (2021)72 Cal.App.5th 208, 216.) Unlike other
discovery sanctions, an award under this Code section is not a penalty, but is instead designed to
reimburse the reasonable expenses a party incurred in proving the truth of a requested admission when
the admission sought was of substantial importance, such that the trial would have been expedited or
shortened if the request had been admitted. (City of Glendale, LLC 235 Cal.App.4th at 359; Grace v.
Mansourian (2015) Cal.App.4th 523, 526, 532-537.)



                                                   25
         When a plaintiff seeks to depose a corporate president or other official at the highest level of
corporate management . . . the trial court should first determine whether the plaintiff has shown good
cause that the official has unique or superior personal knowledge of discoverable information.” (Liberty
Mutual Ins. Co. v. Superior Court (1992) 10 Cal.App.4th 1282, 1287; Cal. Code of Civ. Pro. §2025(i)).
If the answer to that inquiry is “no”, then the trial court should “first require the plaintiff to obtain the
necessary discovery through less intrusive methods. These would include interrogatories directed to the
high-level official to explore the state of his or her knowledge or involvement in plaintiff’s case or
involvement in plaintiff’s case; the deposition of lower level employees with appropriate knowledge and
involvement in the subject matter of the litigation; and the organizational deposition of the operation
itself.” (Id.) Only after these avenues are exhausted, and the “plaintiff makes a colorable showing of
good cause that the high-level official possesses necessary information to the case, the trial court may
then lift the protective order and allow the deposition to proceed.” (Id.)

        Code of Civil Procedure section 2031.310(i) provides: “if a party fails to obey an order
compelling further responses, the court may make those orders that are just, including the imposition of
an issue sanction, an evidence sanction, or a terminating sanction.” (See also Department of Forestry &
Fire Protection v. Howell (2017) 18 Cal.App.5th 154.) There are four types of terminating sanctions:
(1) striking pleadings in whole or in part; (2) staying further proceedings by a party until it obeys a
discovery order; (3) dismissing the action or part of it; and (4) rendering a default judgment. (Code of
Civ. Pro. §2023.030(d).) An issue sanction either orders that designated facts be taken as established or
prohibits a party from supporting or opposing designated claims or defenses. (Code of Civ. Pro.
§2023.030(b); Kuhns v. State (1992) 8 Cal.App.4th 982, 989; Marriage of Chakko (2004) 115
Cal.App.4th 104, 109-110.

IV.    Analysis

        The Court does not find on this record that issue sanctions are appropriate. It is clear to the
Court that Tesla made efforts to respond to Plaintiffs’ discovery requests. As detailed below, in some
cases, Plaintiffs simply do not like the answers received, however, in others it appears to the Court that
Tesla continues to try and have it both ways in a way that is untenable. The Court addresses each of
Plaintiff’s requests by set below.

        Request for Production, Set Six (No. 214): This request seeks “All DOCUMENTS that support
Elon Musk’s assertion, in an April 2018 test drive of the Tesla model 3 with CBS’s Gayle King, that
Tesla Autopilot can reduce accidents by a factor of ten.” Tesla responds by stating that there “is no
single set of documents or studies underpinning Mr. Musk’s general statements about the potential for
driver assistance features, like Autopilot, to save lives” then identifies publicly available documents by
url. If these are the documents Tesla contends underpin this statement, those are the documents Tesla
will be limited to for any dispositive motion practice and at trial. Thus, Plaintiffs’ motion to compel a
further response is DENIED.

       Special Interrogatories, Set Three (46-48) and Set Five (72-105): These Special Interrogatories,
which are quite extensive, are directed to obtaining facts, documents and witnesses with knowledge to
support the various statements Plaintiffs contend Mr. Musk made and that were quoted in the Court’s
March 10, 2023 Order. Tesla provided a lengthy answer that largely incorporates what it said
elsewhere. However, it is a response to the questions posed. The Court DENIES Plaintiffs’ motion to


                                                     26
compel further responses to these interrogatories. Of course, this means that unless it provides further
information, Tesla is confined to the content of these responses in the event the specific documents, facts
and/or witnesses with knowledge regarding these alleged statements become an issue at trial.

        Special Interrogatories, Set Four (49-51 and 64-69): All of these interrogatories are directed in
different ways to gather information about Tesla’s response, if any, to NTSB Safety Recommendation
H-17-042. This subject was not addressed during the February 23, 2023 hearing or the Court’s March
10, 2023 Order that resulted from that hearing. Tesla avers that Plaintiffs have not met and conferred
regarding these responses. In any event, the Court has reviewed the responses and DENIES Plaintiffs’
motion to compel further responses to these interrogatories. Again, this means that unless it provides
further information, Tesla is confined to the content of these responses in the event its response to the
NTSB Safety Recommendation H-17-042, if any, becomes an issue at trial.

        Request for Production of Documents, Set Seven: These requests are all directed to obtaining
data to support certain numerical conclusions by Tesla or what appear to the Court to be naming
conventions. None of these requests has anything to do with the issues presented during the February
23, 2023 hearing or the March 10, 2023 order that resulted from that hearing. Further, it seems clear to
the Court that the parties have not met and conferred adequately regarding these requests. It is also not
clear to the Court the relevance of the material sought, despite the fact that it does appear that it would
be burdensome to collect and produce. Thus, on this record, Plaintiffs’ motion to compel is DENIED.
Tesla is, however, ordered to continue collecting and producing documents it has already agreed to
produce in its written responses.

        Requests for Admission, Set Two; Form Interrogatory 17.1; Requests for Admissions, Set Three:
All of these Requests for Admission relate to confirming whether Mr. Musk (or in some cases Tesla)
made certain statements during various interviews or other public engagements. The Court made clear
during the February 23, 2023 hearing and in both its tentative and final rulings related to that hearing,
that the Court was granting Tesla’s Motion for Protective Order regarding Mr. Musk’s deposition on the
condition that it provide fulsome responses to the written discovery regarding the statements outlined
with specificity in the Court’s March 10, 2023 Order. In other words, the Court was giving Tesla a
chance to provide the information Plaintiffs sought in writing, which would have obviated the need for
Mr. Musk’s deposition.

       Also important, is that the Court has already ruled that at this discovery stage, the consumer
expectation test is “still in play.” (March 10, 2023 Order, p. 8.) Thus, objections and arguments about
relevance are not well taken at this stage of the motion practice. It is with this backdrop, that the Court
makes the following additional rulings and analysis regarding particular Requests for Admission.

        Plaintiffs’ Motion to Compel regarding Requests 16, 27, 28, 37, 42, 44, 46, 67 and 69 is
DENIED. The Court agrees that Request 27 is too vague; the other Requests are sufficiently admitted.
Plaintiff’s motion regarding Requests 19, 43 and 45 is GRANTED – there is no reason why Tesla cannot
simply admit these Requests without referring to another Request.

        Tesla objects that Requests 61, 62, 63, 66 and 68 are from its website and are not statements
Plaintiffs allege were made by Mr. Musk, and therefore outside the scope of the Court’s March 10, 2023
order. Tesla is incorrect. These Requests relate directly to citations set forth in the Court’s March 10


                                                    27
order. Tesla needs to indicate whether these are Tesla statements or statements from a customer.
Plaintiffs’ Motion to Compel as to these Requests is GRANTED.

       Citing to Smith v. Circle P Ranch Co., Inc. (1978) 87 Cal.App.3d 267, 275, in response to
Requests 26, 31, 60, 64, and 65, Tesla contends it has answered adequately because Plaintiffs’ Requests
do not contain a correct quotation. Smith does stand for the proposition that a response that states “As
framed, denied” is a sworn denial. However, Smith goes on to find that the party providing that sworn
denial had a duty to investigate, failed to do so, and that sanctions were therefore justified for such
responses. It appears to the Court that Tesla is really concerned that the quotations are taken out of
context. If that is the case, as Tesla itself states elsewhere, Tesla must state the part it can admit and
include the rest of the quotation it thinks needs for the answer to be complete. Thus, Plaintiffs’ motion
to compel complete responses to these Requests is GRANTED.

       For the rest of the Requests in these sets and for all of Request for Admissions Re Genuineness,
Set Three, Tesla states something akin to the following:

       Tesla has undertaken a good faith investigation of sources reasonably available to
       it and is unable to admit or deny the request as Tesla does not maintain
       possession, control or custody of a recording of the discussion. Tesla does not
       maintain a repository of Elon Musk’s public statements or media interviews. Mr.
       Musk confirmed he did not independently record the discussion or maintain a
       copy of the original video, nor did he take notes, and therefore cannot recall the
       details sufficiently to admit or deny their accuracy. Consequently, while Tesla
       does not expect the file has been altered or manipulated, it cannot authenticate a
       non-Tesla document that it cannot independently validate, and is not obligated to
       otherwise admit the accuracy of a statement untethered to its source as presented
       in this request.

        This is where the Court views Tesla as still trying to have it both ways, or, perhaps put more
accurately, Telsa is trying to avoid at all costs tying itself to Mr. Musk’s statements or denying outright
that Mr. Musk made the statements. Tesla’s argument that it cannot commit one way or another to the
statements, or in some cases even admit that it is Mr. Musk in the videos, because of the ease with which
deep fakes can be made is unconvincing for several reasons. First, the Court reviewed Exhibits B and C
to the Declaration of Lauren O. Miller, in which audio is attributed to Mr. Musk that he says he did not
say. Tellingly, Mr. Musk is able to identify that these videos are fake because (as must be the case) he
can recall that he did not give that particular TedTalk (even though he did give a TedTalk) or actually
give an interview about nude photos. Thus, plainly, Mr. Musk is able to have some recall as to what
interviews he did and did not do.

        Next, as the Court already stated at the February 23, 2023 hearing, it is not necessary to have a
chain of custody like history for a video for a person depicted in the video to confirm (a) if that is the
person, (b) if the person did or did not perform the act shown in the video and/or (c) if the person did or
did not say something depicted in the video. Mr. Musk was either at these places or he was not; he
either said these things or he did not. Ironically, Tesla’s refusal to answer these questions only makes a
clearer record that Mr. Musk is the only person that has this information to respond to this discovery,
one of the pre-requisites to permitting an Apex deposition.


                                                    28
       Finally, what Tesla is contending is deeply troubling to the Court. Their position is that because
Mr. Musk is famous and might be more of a target for deep fakes, his public statements are immune. In
other words, Mr. Musk, and others in his position, can simply say whatever they like in the public
domain, then hide behind the potential for their recorded statements being a deep fake to avoid taking
ownership of what they did actually say and do. The Court is unwilling to set such a precedent by
condoning Tesla’s approach here.

       As a result, the Court now finds it appropriate to order a limited deposition of Mr. Musk. The
deposition shall be limited to three hours and can only address the Requests for Admission seeking to
confirm that Mr. Musk was at specific interviews and made specific already identified statements during
those interviews. Plaintiffs must bring the recorded statements and show them to Mr. Musk at the
deposition, so that he can state under oath whether or not he made the statements.

       To the extent not already explicitly addressed above, Plaintiffs’ motion is DENIED.


                                                - oo0oo –




                                                   29
