PRELIMINARY DRAFT
Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules of Appellate,
Bankruptcy, Civil, and Criminal Procedure, and the Federal
Rules of Evidence



        Request for Comments on Amendments to:

Appellate Rule         25

Bankruptcy Rules       2003, 5005, 8011, 9006, 9036, and 9037

Civil Rules            5, 5.2, 6, and 55

Criminal Rules         11, 32, 45, 49, and 49.1

Evidence Rules         104 and 902




                  Written Comments Due By
                       February 15, 2027


                               Prepared by the
                 Committee on Rules of Practice and Procedure
                   Judicial Conference of the United States
                                August 2026
                        COMMITTEE ON RULES OF PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
                                                   OF THE
                            JUDICIAL CONFERENCE OF THE UNITED STATES
                                      WASHINGTON, D.C. 20544

JAMES C. DEVER III                                                              CHAIRS OF ADVISORY COMMITTEES
     CHAIR
                                                                                         ALLISON H. EID
CAROLYN A. DUBAY                                                                        APPELLATE RULES
   SECRETARY
                                                                                      REBECCA B. CONNELLY
                                                                                       BANKRUPTCY RULES

                                                                                        SARAH S. VANCE
                                                                                          CIVIL RULES

                                                                                      MICHAEL W. MOSMAN
                                                                                        CRIMINAL RULES

                                                                                        JESSE M. FURMAN
                                                                                         EVIDENCE RULES


                                           MEMORANDUM

   TO:               The Bench, Bar, and Public

   FROM:             Honorable James C. Dever III, Chair
                     Committee on Rules of Practice and Procedure

   DATE:             August 14, 2026

   RE:         Request for Comments on Proposed Amendments to Federal Rules and Forms
   ____________________________________________________________________________

           The Advisory Committees of the Judicial Conference Committee on Rules of Practice and
   Procedure have published proposed amendments to the federal rules of practice and procedure and
   are seeking public feedback. The proposed amendments to Appellate Rule 25, Bankruptcy Rules
   5005, 8011, 9006, 9036, Civil Rules 5 and 6, and Criminal Rules 45 and 49 relate to the ability of
   self-represented litigants to use a federal court’s electronic filing system to file and serve
   documents. The proposed amendments to Bankruptcy Rule 9037, Civil Rule 5.2, and Criminal
   Rule 49.1 relate to enhanced protection of taxpayer identification numbers and minors’ names in
   public court filings. Other proposed amendments include: Bankruptcy Rule 2003 (relating to
   meetings of creditors); Civil Rule 55 (relating to the clerk’s entry of default); Criminal Rules 11
   and 32 (relating to pleas and sentencing); Evidence Rule 104 (relating to deciding preliminary
   issues of fact); and Evidence Rule 902(1) (relating to self-authentication of public records of
   federally recognized Indian tribes). The text of the proposed rule amendments and supporting
   materials are posted on the Judiciary’s website at: https://www.uscourts.gov/forms-
   rules/proposed-amendments-published-public-comment .




   Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                         Page 2 of 209
   August 2026
Memorandum to the Bench, Bar, and Public
Page 2

                          Opportunity to Submit Written Comments

        Individuals who wish to submit written comments regarding one or more of the proposed
amendments must file their comments no later than February 15, 2027 through the Federal
eRulemaking Portal, https://www.regulations.gov/. Written comments must clearly identify the
proposed amendment or amendments that are the subject of the comments. Please note that all
written comments on proposed rule amendments are part of the official record and will be made
publicly available.

                           Opportunity to Testify at Public Hearings

       Individuals who wish to present oral testimony regarding one or more of the proposed rule
amendments must submit a request to testify to the Administrative Office of the United States
Courts, Rules Committee Staff, by email to RulesCommittee_Secretary@ao.uscourts.gov.
Requests to testify must be received no later than Tuesday, December 8, 2026, regardless of
the hearing date.

       If requests to testify are received, the Advisory Committees will conduct virtual public
hearings on the proposed rule amendments on the following dates:

      Appellate Rules: January 25, 2027; additional day on February 1, 2027, if needed.
      Bankruptcy Rules: January 8, 2027; additional day on February 9, 2027, if needed.
      Civil Rules: January 13, 2027; additional day on January 26, 2027, if needed.
      Criminal Rules: January 20, 2027; additional day on January 27, 2027, if needed.
      Evidence Rules: January 11, 2027; additional day on January 28, 2027, if needed.

        Witnesses who request to testify by the deadline will receive a confirmation email with
instructions on participating in the public hearing. Witnesses are strongly encouraged to submit a
written summary of their proposed testimony by the deadline provided in the confirmation email
(generally two weeks prior to the earliest of the two scheduled hearing dates for the relevant
Advisory Committee). Providing such a summary alerts the Advisory Committee to the points that
will be made and permits committee members to consider whether they have questions before the
hearing. It also ensures that all the points the witness wants to make are in the record.

        If no requests to testify as to a proposed amendment are received by the deadline, the
scheduled hearing is subject to cancellation. In such case, the Advisory Committees will conduct
their deliberations based upon the written comments.

                      Procedure After the Close of the Comment Period

        After any public hearings are conducted and the public comment period closes on February
15, 2027, the written comments and oral testimony will be carefully considered by the relevant
Advisory Committee. During this review, the Advisory Committee may make revisions to the
published version of the proposed amendment to address the written comments, oral testimony, or
other concerns raised by committee members during this review. At the conclusion of this review,




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                        Page 3 of 209
August 2026
Memorandum to the Bench, Bar, and Public
Page 3

the Advisory Committee will either withdraw the proposed rule amendment or approve it, either
as published or with revisions to the rule text or committee note.

        Under the Rules Enabling Act, 28 U.S.C. §§ 2072-2077, upon approval of the proposed
rule amendments by the relevant Advisory Committees, the next step is consideration by the
Judicial Conference Committee on Rules of Practice and Procedure (the Standing Committee).
The Standing Committee may approve the proposed amendment, reject it, or approve it with
revisions to the rule text or committee note. If approved by the Standing Committee, the rule
amendments are then approved by the Judicial Conference, transmitted to the United States
Supreme Court for consideration and adoption, and if adopted by the Court, transmitted to
Congress by May 1, 2028. Absent congressional action, the final rule amendments will take effect
on December 1, 2028.

        If you have questions about the rulemaking process or pending rule amendments, please
contact the Rules Committee Staff at 202-502-1820 or visit https://www.uscourts.gov/forms-rules.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                      Page 4 of 209
August 2026
                                                  TABLE OF CONTENTS


            OVERVIEW: Proposals Relating to Electronic Filing
                      and Service by Self-Represented Litigants..........................8

               Report on Self-Represented Litigants’ Filing & Service (May 2026) ..........9


            OVERVIEW: Proposals Relating to Privacy Rules in Public
                      Court Filings ........................................................................32

               Report on the Privacy Rule Amendments (May 2026) ..............................33


            FEDERAL RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE .............................35

               Excerpt from Report of the Advisory Committee
               on Appellate Rules (May 2026) .................................................................36

               Rule 25.         Filing and Service .................................................................38


            FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE .........................57

               Excerpt from Report of the Advisory Committee
               on Bankruptcy Rules (May 2026) ..............................................................58

               Rule 2003. Meeting of Creditors or Equity Security Holders .................61

               Rule 5005. Filing Papers and Sending Copies to the
                          United States Trustee ............................................................64

               Rule 8011. Filing and Service; Signature ................................................73

               Rule 9006. Computing and Extending Time; Motions ...........................91

               Rule 9036. Electronic Notice and Service ...............................................92

               Rule 9037. Protecting Privacy for Filings .............................................101




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                                                 Page 5 of 209
August 2026
                                                   TABLE OF CONTENTS


            FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE .......................................108

               Excerpt from the Report of the Advisory Committee
               on Civil Rules (May 2026) .......................................................................109

               Excerpt from the Report of the Advisory Committee
               on Civil Rules (December 2025) ..............................................................111

               Rule 5.          Serving and Filing Pleadings and Other Papers ..................114

               Rule 5.2.        Privacy Protection for Filings Made with the Court ...........130

               Rule 6.          Computing and Extending Time; Time for Motion
                                Papers ..................................................................................137

               Rule 55.         Default; Default Judgment ..................................................138


            FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE ..............................142

               Excerpt from the Report of the Advisory Committee
               on Criminal Rules (May 2026).................................................................143

               Rule 11.         Pleas ....................................................................................154

               Rule 32.         Sentencing and Judgment ...................................................156

               Rule 45.         Computing and Extending Time .........................................157

               Rule 49.         Serving and Filing Papers ...................................................158

               Rule 49.1.       Privacy Protection For Filings Made with the Court ..........175


            FEDERAL RULES OF EVIDENCE ........................................................182

               Excerpt from the Report of the Advisory Committee
               on Evidence Rules (May 2026) ................................................................183

               Rule 902.        Evidence That Is Self-Authenticating .................................187

               Rule 104.        Preliminary Questions.........................................................189




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                                                        Page 6 of 209
August 2026
                                                    TABLE OF CONTENTS


            APPENDIX .................................................................................................193

               Procedures for Committees on Rules of Practice
               and Procedure ..........................................................................................194

               List of Committee Members ...................................................................199




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                                                     Page 7 of 209
August 2026
                                         OVERVIEW:



               Proposals Relating to Electronic Filing and Service by
                            Self-Represented Litigants




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules           Page 8 of 209
August 2026
      Excerpt from the May 11, 2026 Report on Self-Represented Litigants’ Filing and Service




                                        MEMORANDUM



DATE:          May 11, 2026

TO:            Standing Committee on Rules of Practice and Procedure

FROM:          Catherine T. Struve

RE:            Project on self-represented litigants’ filing and service


        I write to provide an overview of the package of proposed amendments relating to service
and electronic filing by self-represented litigants. This package includes proposed amendments
to Appellate Rule 25, Bankruptcy Rules 5005, 8011, 9006, and 9036, Civil Rules 5 and 6, and
Criminal Rules 45 and 49. I enclose a chart showing how components of the package compare
across the rule sets. I also enclose the proposed amendments.

        As the Committee knows, this project focuses on two broad topics: (1) increases to
electronic access to court by self-represented litigants (whether via the court’s electronic-filing
system or alternative means) and (2) service (of papers subsequent to the complaint) by self-
represented litigants on those who will receive an electronic notice of filing (“notice of case
activity”) through the court’s electronic-filing system or through a court-based electronic-
noticing program.

         As to service, the proposed amendments would eliminate the requirement of separate
(paper) service (of documents after the complaint) on a litigant who receives a notice of case
activity through the court’s electronic-filing system or a court-based electronic-noticing program.
As to filing, the proposed amendments would: (1) presumptively permit self-represented litigants
to file electronically (unless a court order or local rule bars them from doing so) and (2) provide
that a local rule or general court order that bars self-represented litigants from using the court’s
electronic-filing system must include reasonable exceptions or must permit the use of another
electronic method for filing documents and receiving electronic notice of activity in the case.

        A court could comply with the amended filing rule by doing either of the following: (1)
allowing reasonable access for self-represented litigants to the court’s electronic-filing system; or
(2) not allowing self-represented litigants to access the court’s electronic-filing system, but
providing them with an alternative electronic means for filing (such as by email or upload) and
an alternative electronic means for receiving notice of court filings and orders (such as an
electronic noticing program). Under the amended filing rule, a court would need to adopt a local



                                                  1



Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                           Page 9 of 209
August 2026
     Excerpt from the May 11, 2026 Report on Self-Represented Litigants’ Filing and Service


rule or court order disallowing access to the court’s electronic-filing system for self-represented
litigants if it wanted to foreclose such access; the default would be access. The rule would permit
a court to enter an order barring a particular litigant from using the court’s electronic-filing
system.

        Part I of this memo recounts a brief history of the project, including efforts to coordinate
the work across the four sets of rules in order to produce a consistent set of provisions. Part II
highlights key features of the proposed amendments. Part III discusses the remaining variances
across the four sets of proposed amendments, including (in Part III.C) one aspect of the proposed
Note language that the Standing Committee may wish to consider standardizing across the rule
sets.

I. Brief history of the project

        The proposals discussed here grow out of a multi-year, cross-committee study of
electronic court access for self-represented litigants and of the service consequences that flow
from increasingly electronic court processes. That study began after Judge Bates, then Chair of
the Standing Committee, convened a working group composed of reporters, Rules Office
attorneys, and Federal Judicial Center researchers to consider pending suggestions relating to
electronic filing by self-represented litigants. (The working group would later expand to include
the relevant advisory committees’ clerk representatives, who worked closely with us to provide
real-world expertise and drafting help.) The group first met in December 2021. It was asked not
only to consider possible rule amendments, but also to gather information about actual court
practices, especially in light of developments after the 2018 electronic-filing amendments and
the experience of courts during the COVID-19 pandemic. The 2018 amendments had adopted a
general rule requiring represented parties to file electronically, while treating unrepresented
litigants differently. Under the current national rules, self-represented litigants generally must
file non-electronically unless authorized to file electronically by court order or local rule. The
central policy question for the working group was whether developments since 2018 justified
moving away from that default approach.

        The suggestions that prompted renewed consideration shared a common concern: that the
existing rules often left self-represented litigants with less timely, less convenient, and less equal
access to the courts than represented litigants. A number of 2020 submissions urged that self-
represented litigants be allowed to file electronically for reasons of fairness, safety, disability
accommodation, and equal access. Several of those suggestions were spurred by pandemic
conditions and stressed the burdens and health risks of requiring paper filing through the mail or
in person, as well as the disadvantages self-represented litigants face when they must wait for
paper orders while represented litigants receive immediate electronic notice. 1 John Hawkinson
pointed to districts that categorically barred non-attorney pro se litigants from even seeking


1 See, e.g., Suggestion 20-CV-J (Dr. Usha Jain), available at https://www.uscourts.gov/forms-
rules/records-rules-committees/suggestions/usha-jain-20-cv-j.


                                                  2



Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                           Page 10 of 209
August 2026
     Excerpt from the May 11, 2026 Report on Self-Represented Litigants’ Filing and Service


electronic-filing privileges and suggested that the rules should discourage such blanket bans,
perhaps by indicating that leave should be freely given. 2 Sai advocated reversing the
presumption against access and replacing it with nationwide presumptive permission for pro se
use of CM/ECF, including for case-initiating filings; treating pro se status as presumptive good
cause for nonelectronic filing; forbidding restrictions based solely on pro se or non-attorney
status; permitting individualized prohibitions for good cause, such as vexatious conduct; and
providing parity with attorney filers as to training and registration, without fees. 3

         From the beginning, committee discussions suggested that the problem was not unitary.
The appellate courts appeared to be more receptive to self-represented electronic filing than
district courts, and bankruptcy courts presented distinct concerns because of case-initiation
effects, signature issues, and the availability of electronic self-representation systems.
Meanwhile, another issue surfaced: when a self-represented litigant filed on paper or by another
non-CM/ECF method and the clerk’s office then uploaded the filing to CM/ECF, should the
rules still require that litigant to make separate traditional service on parties who would receive a
notice of electronic filing anyway?

        The FJC’s 2022 study of federal courts’ electronic filing practices for pro se litigants
provided the project’s first broad empirical baseline.4 That study showed substantial variation
across court types and districts. The courts of appeals were the most receptive to CM/ECF access
for non-incarcerated self-represented litigants; district courts were much more mixed; and
bankruptcy courts rarely gave self-represented debtors CM/ECF access, though a number used
electronic self-representation systems. The study also confirmed that “electronic filing” could
mean different things: full CM/ECF access, filing by email, and electronic upload portals. 5


2 See Suggestion 20-CV-EE (John A. Hawkinson), available at https://www.uscourts.gov/forms-
rules/records-rules-committees/suggestions/john-hawkinson-20-cv-ee.
3 See Suggestion 21-CV-J (Sai), available at https://www.uscourts.gov/forms-rules/records-
rules-committees/suggestions/sai-21-cv-j.
4 See Tim Reagan, Carly Giffin, and Roy Germano, Federal Courts’ Electronic Filing by Pro Se
Litigants (FJC 2022), available at https://www.fjc.gov/content/368499/federal-courts-electronic-
filing-pro-se-litigants.
         An additional FJC study on filing times underscored one practical consequence of
electronic access: because clerk’s offices are open only during limited daytime hours, while
electronic filing ordinarily remains available until midnight, represented litigants are often able
to file after counter hours; indeed, the study found that nearly one third of district-court
responses were filed after 5:00 p.m. See Tim Reagan et al., Electronic Filing Times in Federal
Courts 4 (FJC 2022), available at https://www.fjc.gov/content/365889/electronic-filing-times-
federal-courts.
5 An FJC study of local rules, published in 2025, confirmed that local practice in the district
courts remains varied: “more than two thirds of the federal district courts permit self-represented
litigants to use the court’s electronic filing system at least on a case-by-case basis,” while 29



                                                  3



Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                          Page 11 of 209
August 2026
     Excerpt from the May 11, 2026 Report on Self-Represented Litigants’ Filing and Service



        The advisory committees’ discussions in fall 2022 and early 2023 brought the project into
sharper focus. Across the committees, members raised a number of concerns: the difficulty of
case initiation in CM/ECF, the possibility of inappropriate filings, burdens on clerks’ offices,
training needs, cybersecurity, privacy and sealing issues, and the special problems posed by
prisoner and bankruptcy litigation. At the same time, many participants emphasized the benefits
of broader electronic access: fewer paper filings, reduced mailing burdens, more timely receipt
of court orders and notices, and fewer disputes about what had been filed and when. The
Bankruptcy Rules Committee showed substantial sympathy for the project’s access-to-courts
rationale but also voiced concerns about screening, signatures, and bankruptcy matters that
featured multiple unrepresented litigants. In the Civil Rules Committee discussions, some
skepticism was voiced about whether some aspects of the matter were better handled through
technology and administration rather than rules. The Appellate Rules Committee appeared
relatively open to broader access, reflecting existing appellate practice. And the Criminal Rules
Committee, while seeing less urgency in expanding filing access because of the small number of
nonincarcerated self-represented criminal litigants, showed real interest in the service issue
because it could affect incarcerated litigants and § 2255 movants who otherwise would spend
time and limited funds sending paper copies to recipients already receiving electronic notice.

        To test the service issue and the practical consequences of broader access, Dr. Tim
Reagan and I conducted follow-up interviews in spring 2023 with court personnel from districts
that had eliminated redundant service requirements (some of which had also broadened
electronic access).6 Interviewees from districts that exempted self-represented paper filers from
separately serving CM/ECF participants reported that the practice worked well and imposed no
additional burden on clerks’ offices. The interviews also suggested that courts providing
CM/ECF access or other electronic pathways to self-represented litigants generally viewed those
programs positively, citing reduced paper handling, easier service of court orders, and creation of
a reliable electronic record. Although questions remained about sealed filings, staffing, training,
and the rare case involving multiple self-represented litigants, the interviews materially
strengthened the case for a service amendment and narrowed the factual uncertainties
surrounding increased access.

       By 2023 and 2024, work focused on the two subjects now reflected in the current


districts “generally prohibit” such use; the study also found continued use in a number of courts
of alternatives such as email filing, online portals, and electronic-noticing programs. See Tim
Reagan, United States District Courts’ Local Rules and Procedures on Electronic Filing by Self-
Represented Litigants 1 (FJC 2025), available at https://www.fjc.gov/content/391989/united-
states-district-courts-local-rules-and-procedures-electronic-filing-self.
6 See September 18, 2023 memorandum concerning spring 2023 district-court interviews,
included starting at page 264 of the Civil Rules Committee’s fall 2023 agenda book, available at
https://www.uscourts.gov/sites/default/files/2023-
10_civil_rules_committee_meeting_agenda_book_11-6_final_0.pdf.


                                                 4



Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                        Page 12 of 209
August 2026
     Excerpt from the May 11, 2026 Report on Self-Represented Litigants’ Filing and Service


proposals. The first concerns filing: whether the rules should presumptively permit self-
represented litigants to file electronically, subject to court order or local rule, and whether courts
that generally bar use of the court’s electronic-filing system should be required either to make
reasonable exceptions or to provide another electronic means for filing and receiving notice. The
second concerns service: whether the rules should eliminate the requirement that a self-
represented litigant separately serve papers filed after the complaint on persons who will receive
a notice of filing through the court’s electronic-filing system or a court-based electronic-noticing
program. In fall 2024, the committees reviewed a tentative sketch of a possible amendment to
Civil Rule 5 that embodied those two policy choices.

        The Bankruptcy Rules Committee’s position changed significantly over the course of the
project. Although bankruptcy participants were initially sympathetic to the project’s access-to-
courts rationale, by late 2024 and early 2025 the Committee appeared likely to decline
participation because of concerns about case initiation, signatures and verification, burdens on
clerk’s offices, inappropriate filings, and the possibility of multiple self-represented participants
who might not know whom they still had to serve by paper. In April 2025, however, rather than
definitively opting out, the Committee referred the matter to its Technology, Privacy, and Public
Access Subcommittee for further study. In summer 2025, that Subcommittee concluded that the
Committee should join the project at least through publication, both to preserve consistency with
the other rules sets and to obtain the benefit of public comment. The Committee voted in
September 2025 to participate on that basis. At the same time, some Bankruptcy Rules
Committee members continued to express reservations and indicated that they viewed
publication as a way to gather further information; depending on the comments received, they
might oppose final adoption after publication.

       By early spring 2026 the working-group participants had fashioned the coordinated set of
proposed amendments. Prior to the Advisory Committee meetings, the Style Consultants to the
Standing Committee provided a thorough and helpful review of the package of proposed
amendments.

II. Key features of the proposals

        The proposed amendments address two related topics: electronic filing by self-
represented litigants and service of papers after the complaint on persons who receive electronic
notice through the court’s filing system or a court-based electronic-noticing program. Across the
affected rules, the proposals would move the national rules away from a presumption against
electronic access for self-represented litigants and toward a presumption in favor of such access,
while preserving courts’ authority to impose reasonable limits. At the same time, the proposals
would eliminate redundant paper service when the court’s system will generate a notice of case
activity to the recipient.

       As to filing, the central change is that self-represented litigants would be presumptively
allowed to use the court’s electronic-filing system to file papers and receive notice of activity in



                                                  5



Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                           Page 13 of 209
August 2026
     Excerpt from the May 11, 2026 Report on Self-Represented Litigants’ Filing and Service


the case, unless a court order or local rule provides otherwise. Under the current rules, the default
runs in the opposite direction: a self-represented litigant may file electronically only if a court
order or local rule allows it. The proposed amendments would reverse that presumption in
Appellate Rule 25, Bankruptcy Rules 5005 and 8011, Civil Rule 5, and Criminal Rule 49. In the
Appellate, Bankruptcy, and Civil Rules, the proposals would retain the existing authority to
require electronic filing by an unrepresented litigant by case-specific order or by local rule with
reasonable exceptions. The Criminal Rules proposal differs slightly in wording because Criminal
Rule 49 currently does not authorize requiring all self-represented parties to file electronically,
but the proposal likewise would allow self-represented parties to use the system unless restricted
by order or local rule.

         The proposals do not create an unlimited right of electronic access. Each set of
amendments would expressly authorize courts to impose reasonable conditions and restrictions
on access. The Committee Notes give examples such as limiting access to nonincarcerated
litigants, requiring training or certifications, restricting certain categories of filings, or denying or
revoking access for a particular litigant. But the proposals would also place a new national limit
on blanket local bans: a court could not bar all self-represented litigants from using the court’s
electronic-filing system unless the prohibition either includes reasonable exceptions or is paired
with another electronic method for filing papers (such as email filing or an upload portal) and
receiving notice (such as a court-based noticing program). In that respect, the proposals seek not
only to expand access to CM/ECF itself, but also to ensure that courts maintaining more
restrictive CM/ECF regimes still provide some meaningful electronic path for filing and notice.
         .
         As to service, the proposals would eliminate the need for separate paper service of post-
complaint filings on persons who will receive a notice of case activity through the court’s
electronic-filing system. This change applies in Appellate Rule 25, Bankruptcy Rules 8011 and
9036, Civil Rule 5, and Criminal Rule 49. The basic idea is straightforward: when a self-
represented litigant files a paper document or uses another non-CM/ECF method, court staff
ordinarily upload that filing into the electronic docket. Once that occurs, the court’s system
generates an electronic notice to registered recipients. The proposals would treat that notice of
case activity as service, so the filer need not also serve those same recipients separately on paper.
This extends to self-represented non-electronic filers the same practical benefit already enjoyed
when a registered user serves another registered user through the electronic-filing system.

        The service provisions are also reorganized to reflect the modern primacy of service
through the court’s electronic system. In each rules set, service by a notice of case activity is
addressed first, and the proposals add a common definition of “notice of case activity” broad
enough to include “notice of electronic filing,” “notice of docket activity,” and similar future
terminology. The proposals preserve other service methods as alternatives, including (variously)
other consented-to electronic means, personal delivery, mail, and commercial carrier. This is
important because a filer may still wish to serve by another permissible means before the clerk’s
office uploads a non-electronic filing and the system generates the notice.




                                                    6



Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                             Page 14 of 209
August 2026
     Excerpt from the May 11, 2026 Report on Self-Represented Litigants’ Filing and Service


         The proposals also address when service by notice of case activity is complete. For
purposes of deadlines to make service, service by the notice of case activity would be treated as
complete on the date of filing. But for deadlines that run from the date of service, service by the
notice of case activity would be treated as complete on the date of the notice of case activity.
That distinction is meant to protect the recipient in the event there is a lag between the time the
filing is received by the court and the time it is uploaded into the electronic system. The
proposals likewise carry forward the current principle that electronic service is not effective if
the filer learns that it did not reach the intended recipient. They also allow courts, by order or
local rule, to require other means of service for sealed filings; the appellate proposal additionally
allows a local requirement of other-means service for certain case-initiating proceedings in the
court of appeals.

        Finally, the package includes a few conforming amendments. Civil Rule 5 and Criminal
Rule 49 are revised so that no certificate of service is required when service occurs through the
court’s electronic-filing system under the amended provisions. Civil Rule 6, Criminal Rule 45,
and Bankruptcy Rule 9006 are amended to conform cross-references governing the extra three
days added after certain kinds of service.

III. Remaining variances

        The enclosed comparison chart shows the text of the proposed Rules across the different
Rule sets. As is customary for joint committee projects, the participants strove to maintain
parallel treatment across the four rule sets. As is also not unusual, there do remain some aspects
of the proposals as to which the committees’ approaches diverge. The remainder of this memo
focuses on explaining those divergences.

       A. Self-represented litigant (“SRL”) provisions generally: “unrepresented” versus
             “self-represented”

         The Bankruptcy, Civil, and Appellate Rules proposals use the term “unrepresented” to
describe self-represented litigants, whereas the Criminal Rule uses “self-represented.” Though
the latter term is preferred by many project participants, implementing that preference is not
practicable in the Bankruptcy, Civil, and Appellate Rules because too many existing rules in
those sets would have to be amended correspondingly.

        This difference seems warranted by differences between the rules sets (that is, that the
current Criminal Rules use the term “unrepresented” only in Rule 49). Notably, the proposed
amendments to Criminal Rule 17 presented for final approval in this agenda book use the term
“self-represented.”

       This variance seems justified.




                                                  7



Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                          Page 15 of 209
August 2026
     Excerpt from the May 11, 2026 Report on Self-Represented Litigants’ Filing and Service


       B.      SRL e-filing: Self-represented “parties” or self-represented “individuals”

        Three of the four rule sets would extend the new e-filing default approach only to self-
represented “parties,” but the Bankruptcy Rules proposal would extend it to self-represented
“individuals.” The reason for the difference has to do with concerns that may balance out
differently in the bankruptcy context.

       The current rules vary in the term that they use to denote an unrepresented filer. Criminal
Rule 49 says “party,” Appellate Rule 25 and Civil Rule 5 say “person,” and the Bankruptcy
Rules say “individual.” (Terminology in the Bankruptcy Rules is affected by the definitions in
the Bankruptcy Code.)

        The self-represented litigant e-filing provisions proposed for the Civil, Criminal, and
Appellate Rules refer to access for unrepresented “parties.” This is a shift from the current Civil
and Appellate Rules (which refer to an unrepresented “person”), though it carries forward current
Criminal Rule 49’s reference to a self-represented “party.” The reason for the shift is that the
amended provision flips the default presumption from one of non-access to one of access to the
court’s electronic-filing system. Once the presumption is inverted to say that self-represented
litigants may e-file unless barred by order or local rule, it seems advisable to change “person” to
“party” so that lay people who are not parties to the case do not cite the rule as granting them
access.7 In the Criminal Rules context, there is an additional reason to use “party” – that is,
because that is the term used in current Criminal Rule 49. Criminal Rule 49(b)(3)(B) deals only
with electronic filing by a “party not represented by an attorney.” Meanwhile, Criminal Rule
49(c) provides: “A nonparty may serve and file a paper only if doing so is required or permitted
by law. A nonparty must serve every party as required by Rule 49(a), but may use the court's
electronic-filing system only if allowed by court order or local rule.”

       The self-represented litigant e-filing provisions proposed for Bankruptcy Rules 5005 and
8011 refer to access for unrepresented “individuals.” Current Rules 5005 and 8011 also use the
term “individual.” The Bankruptcy Rules Committee considered and rejected the term
“unrepresented party,” because it is concerned that that term would erroneously suggest to
readers that a nonhuman litigant could represent itself. To avoid that possibility, the Bankruptcy
Rules Committee determined that the Bankruptcy Rules should continue to use “individual,”
which is the term those rules use to refer to a human being.

        As Professor Gibson succinctly put it, the choice between “party” and “individual”
depends on a judgment call about “which is more likely (or more harmful): [1] having someone
read ‘unrepresented party’ to mean any party (whether a real person or not) can appear without
an attorney, or [2] having someone read ‘unrepresented individual’ to mean you don’t need to be
connected to a case to file a paper in it.” The Bankruptcy Rules Committee’s decision to use


7 We have heard from participants that, from the clerk’s perspective, it’s important that the rule
draw that boundary.


                                                 8



Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                        Page 16 of 209
August 2026
     Excerpt from the May 11, 2026 Report on Self-Represented Litigants’ Filing and Service


“individual” may be justified by features specific to bankruptcy practice – that is, the number of
artificial entities (e.g., small creditors) that may participate in a bankruptcy proceeding and might
wish to appear without a lawyer. Meanwhile, the other three sets of rules already use words (to
denote unrepresented litigants) that encompass artificial entities – they say either “person” (Civil
and Appellate) or “party” (Criminal) – and we haven’t heard of those terms giving rise to any
erroneous assumptions that artificial entities can appear without a lawyer; so the Bankruptcy
Rules Committee’s concern may not be as salient for the other three sets of rules.

          Accordingly, this variance seems justifiable.

          C. SRL e-filing: Note language on requiring court permission to use e-filing system

        As presented in the Advisory Committee agenda books, the Committee Notes to the
proposed electronic-filing provisions included a bracketed sentence concerning the permissibility
of a local provision requiring unrepresented parties to obtain court permission to use the court’s
e-filing system. This language was included in the draft based on a suggestion from a member of
the Criminal Rules Committee.

        The bracketed statement – as shown in the Civil, Bankruptcy, and Criminal agenda
      8
books – read: “[For example, local provisions that require unrepresented parties who seek to
use the court’s electronic-filing system to obtain permission from the judge to whom the case is
assigned would count as including reasonable exceptions, so long as such permission is not
unreasonably withheld in practice.]”

        Although the Civil and Bankruptcy Rules Committees voted to approve the draft for
publication with this sentence included in the relevant Committee Notes, the sentence drew
attention and a good deal of skeptical comment, particularly in the Civil Rules Committee
discussion. On one hand, including this language would recognize existing practices in more
than half of the federal courts of appeals and district courts 9 and would give clerks’ offices
something to point to when applying a requirement that a self-represented litigant seek court
permission in order to use the court’s electronic-filing system. On the other hand, because it
would be challenging for an unrepresented party to demonstrate that a court unreasonably
withholds permission in practice, participants expressed concern that this Note language might
seem to bless local provisions that effectively deny e-filing to unrepresented parties in general.


8 The relevant sentence in the Note to Appellate Rule 25 as set out in the Appellate Rules
Committee’s agenda book was similar but not identical.
9 See Tim Reagan, United States District Courts’ Local Rules and Procedures on Electronic
Filing by Self-Represented Litigants (FJC 2025) at 1 (reporting that 54 federal districts “permit
self-represented litigants to request permission to use the electronic filing system”); Tim Reagan,
Carly Giffin, and Roy Germano, Federal Courts’ Electronic Filing by Pro Se Litigants (FJC
2025) at 6-7 (reporting that seven courts of appeals “allow [pro se litigants to register as
CM/ECF users] with individual permission”).


                                                   9



Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                         Page 17 of 209
August 2026
     Excerpt from the May 11, 2026 Report on Self-Represented Litigants’ Filing and Service


        During the Appellate Rules Committee meeting, a member proposed revised language –
which the Appellate Rules Committee adopted – that accounts for the concerns of both
participants who favored the original bracketed language and participants who were concerned
by that original language. The revised language adopted by the Appellate Rules Committee
reads: “A local provision requiring unrepresented parties to obtain the court’s permission in
order to use the court’s electronic-filing system would count as including reasonable exceptions,
so long as such permission is granted or withheld in accordance with the reasonable conditions
and restrictions on access set by the court.” (The concluding phrase refers back to the ‘reasonable
conditions and restrictions’ that are discussed earlier in the Committee Note.) The hope is that
with this change, the Note language validates the practices of courts that wish to build in a
requirement of court permission, while avoiding the risk that the Note would seem to bless the
practice of a court where standardless discretion to withhold permission results in effective
denial of access in practice.

        Because the Appellate Rules Committee met after the Civil and Bankruptcy Rules
Committees, those two committees did not have the opportunity to consider the Appellate Rules
Committee’s revised language. The Criminal Rules Committee met last. Though some support
was voiced for the Note language as set forth in the Criminal Rules Committee’s agenda book,
the Committee ultimately voted to adopt language paralleling the Appellate Committee Note. As
adopted by the Criminal Rules Committee, the relevant sentence in the Criminal Rule 49
Committee Note reads: “For example, local provisions that require self-represented parties who
seek to use the court’s electronic-filing system to obtain the court’s permission would count as
including reasonable exceptions, so long as such permission is granted or withheld in accordance
with the reasonable conditions and restrictions on access set by the court.”

       I recommend that the Standing Committee consider adopting similar language for the
Committee Notes to Civil Rule 5(d)(2)(B), Bankruptcy Rule 5005(a)(3)(B), and Bankruptcy
Rule 8011(a)(2)(C). That proposed language is shown as a bracketed alternative in those
Committee Notes, following the bracketed sentence that originally appeared in the Civil and
Bankruptcy Rules Committees’ agenda books. *

       D. SRL e-filing: “in the case” versus “in the party’s case”

        Proposed Bankruptcy Rules 5005(a)(3)(B)(i) and 8011(a)(2)(C)(i) refer to “receiv[ing]
notice of activity in the case,” while proposed Appellate Rule 25(a)(2)(C)(i), Civil Rule
5(d)(2)(B)(i), and Criminal Rule 49(b)(2)(B)(i) refer to “receiv[ing] notice of activity in the
party’s case.” The latter three rules specify “in the party’s case” because we have heard from
clerk participants how important it is to make clear that the default principle of access to e-filing
should extend only to the case in which the SRL is a party, and not to other cases. But the
Bankruptcy Rules will say, simply, “in the case” – because in the bankruptcy context, there is a


*
  Revised August 14, 2026: The Standing Committee approved the proposed bracketed alternative
language in the committee notes at its June 2026 meeting.


                                                 10



Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                          Page 18 of 209
August 2026
     Excerpt from the May 11, 2026 Report on Self-Represented Litigants’ Filing and Service


concern that saying “in the individual’s case” would suggest that the denoted individual must
always be the debtor, and that’s not true, because the rule is designed to extend to self-
represented human creditors as well.

       This variance seems justified.

       E. SRL e-filing: requirements to file electronically

        This variance is carried forward from the existing rules. Unlike the other SRL e-filing
default rules, proposed Criminal Rule 49(b)(2)(B)(i) (like existing Criminal Rule 49(b)(3)(B))
contains no provision about the circumstances under which a SRL can be required to e-file,
because the Criminal Rules Committee has made a judgment call that the Criminal Rule
shouldn’t authorize a court to require a SRL to e-file. As the 2018 Committee Note to Criminal
Rule 49 explains,

               [Rule 49](b)(3)(B) requires unrepresented parties to file nonelectronically,
       unless allowed to file electronically by court order or local rule. This language
       differs from that of the amended Civil Rule, which provides that an unrepresented
       party may be “required” to file electronically by a court order or local rule that
       allows reasonable exceptions. A different approach to electronic filing by
       unrepresented parties is needed in criminal cases, where electronic filing by pro se
       prisoners presents significant challenges. Pro se parties filing papers under the
       criminal rules generally lack the means to e-file or receive electronic
       confirmations, yet must be provided access to the courts under the Constitution.

       This variance has already been determined to be justified.

       F. E-filing and signatures

       Currently, all five relevant rules contain (with immaterial variations) the following
provision, added in 2018: “A filing made through a person’s electronic-filing account and
authorized by that person, together with that person’s name on a signature block, constitutes the
person's signature.” See, e.g., Civil Rule 5(d)(3)(C).

         The Bankruptcy Rules Committee has decided to amend their signature provisions to use
“individual” instead of “person.” Their reason is that “person” (as defined in Section 101 of the
Bankruptcy Code) includes some artificial entities, and that it does not make sense to refer to an
artificial entity as having its own electronic-filing account and engaging in the act of signing. As
noted above, to denote human entities, the Bankruptcy Rules use the term “individual.”

       The Bankruptcy Code’s definitions are not relevant to the non-bankruptcy rule sets, and
“person” has been used in all the signature rules for nearly eight years without causing any
perceptible problem, so no change to the non-bankruptcy rules’ signature provisions is proposed



                                                 11



Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                         Page 19 of 209
August 2026
     Excerpt from the May 11, 2026 Report on Self-Represented Litigants’ Filing and Service


for the other three sets of rules.

       Approving the Bankruptcy Rules Committee’s proposal to amend their signature
provisions to use “individual” does not seem to me to provide a reason to require the other three
Advisory Committees to similarly amend their signature provisions.

        G. “Documents” versus “papers”

       The choice between referring to “documents” or to “papers” is not substantive. But it is a
considered choice.

         Bankruptcy Rule 5005, Civil Rule 5, Criminal Rule 49, and (in the main) Appellate Rule
25 use the word “paper,” while Bankruptcy Rules 8011 and 9036 use the word “document.” On
the theory that internal consistency within a rule may be more valuable than consistency across
rules, the proposals use “paper” in the amendments to Bankruptcy Rule 5005, Civil Rule 5,
Criminal Rule 49, and Appellate Rule 25, but use “document” in the amendments to Bankruptcy
Rules 8011 and 9036.

                                             *****




                                                12



Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                       Page 20 of 209
August 2026
SRL provision comparison chart, April 30, 2026

This comparison chart shows – as clean rule text – the various SRL e-ﬁling and service provisions, along with other related provisions in the
a ected rules.



 Bankruptcy (not               Bankruptcy (appellate)        Appellate                    Civil                        Criminal
 appellate)
 E-ﬁling general rule:         E-ﬁling general rule:         E-ﬁling general rule:        E-ﬁling general rule:        E-ﬁling general rule:
 Bankruptcy Rule               Bankruptcy Rule               FRAP 25(a)(2)(B): (B)        Civil Rule 5(d)(2)(A): (2)   Criminal Rule 49(b)(2)(A):
 5005(a)(3)(A): (3)            8011(a)(2)(B): (B)            Electronic Filing by a       Electronic Filing and        (2) Electronic Filing and
 Electronic Filing and         Electronic Filing By a        Person Represented by        Signing.                     Signing. (A) By a Party
 Signing.                      Represented Entity—           Counsel--Generally           (A) By a Person              Represented by Counsel
 (A) By a Represented          Generally Required;           Required; Exceptions. A      Represented by               – Generally Required;
 Entity--Generally             Exceptions. An entity         person represented by an     Counsel—Generally            Exceptions. A party
 Required; Exceptions.         represented by an             attorney must ﬁle            Required; Exceptions. A      represented by an
 An entity represented by      attorney must ﬁle             electronically, unless       person represented by an     attorney must ﬁle
 an attorney must ﬁle          electronically, unless        nonelectronic ﬁling is       attorney must ﬁle            electronically, unless
 electronically, unless        nonelectronic ﬁling is        allowed by the court for     electronically, unless       nonelectronic ﬁling is
 nonelectronic ﬁling is        allowed by the court for      good cause or is allowed     nonelectronic ﬁling is       allowed by the court for
 allowed by the court for      cause or is allowed or        or required by local rule.   allowed by the court for     good cause or is allowed
 cause or is allowed or        required by local rule.                                    good cause or is allowed     or required by local rule.
 required by local rule.                                                                  or required by local rule.




                                                                                                                                                1

       Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                                                          Page 21 of 209
       August 2026
E-ﬁling SRL default rule:     E-ﬁling SRL default rule:     E-ﬁling SRL default rule:   E-ﬁling SRL default rule:       E-ﬁling SRL default rule:
Bankruptcy Rule               Bankruptcy Rule               FRAP 25(a)(2)(C)(i): (C)    Civil Rule 5(d)(2)(B)(i): (B)   Criminal Rule
5005(a)(3)(B)(i): (B) By an   8011(a)(2)(C)(i): (C)         Electronic Filing by an     By an Unrepresented             49(b)(2)(B)(i): (B) By a
Unrepresented                 Electronic Filing By an       Unrepresented Party--       Party—When Allowed or           Self-Represented Party
Individual—When               Unrepresented                 When Allowed or             Required.                       – When Allowed.
Allowed or Required.          Individual—When               Required.                   (i) In General. An              (i) In General. A self-
(i) In General. An            Allowed or Required.          (i) In General. An          unrepresented party may         represented party may
unrepresented individual      (i) In General. An            unrepresented party may     use the court’s                 use the court’s
may use the court’s           unrepresented individual      use the court’s             electronic-ﬁling system         electronic-ﬁling system
electronic-ﬁling system       may use the court’s           electronic-ﬁling system     to ﬁle papers and receive       to ﬁle papers and receive
to ﬁle papers and receive     electronic-ﬁling system       to ﬁle papers and receive   notice of activity in the       notice of activity in the
notice of activity in the     to ﬁle documents and          notice of activity in the   party’s case, unless a          party’s case, unless a
case, unless a court order    receive notice of activity    party’s case, unless a      court order or local rule       court order or local rule
or local rule prohibits the   in the case, unless a         court order or local rule   prohibits the party from        prohibits the party from
individual from doing so.     court order or local rule     prohibits the party from    doing so. An                    doing so.
An unrepresented              prohibits the individual      doing so. An                unrepresented person
individual may be             from doing so. An             unrepresented person        may be required to ﬁle
required to ﬁle               unrepresented individual      may be required to ﬁle      electronically only by
electronically only by        may be required to ﬁle        electronically only by      order in a case or by a
order in a case or by a       electronically only by        order in a case or by a     local rule that includes
local rule that includes      order in a case or by a       local rule that includes    reasonable exceptions.
reasonable exceptions.        local rule that includes      reasonable exceptions.
                              reasonable exceptions.




                                                                                                                                                    2

      Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                                                           Page 22 of 209
      August 2026
E-ﬁling SRL conditions:      E-ﬁling SRL conditions:       E-ﬁling SRL conditions:      E-ﬁling SRL conditions:      E-ﬁling SRL conditions:
Bankruptcy Rule              Bankruptcy Rule               FRAP 25(a)(2)(C)(ii): (ii)   Civil Rule 5(d)(2)(B)(ii):   Criminal Rule
5005(a)(3)(B)(ii): (ii)      8011(a)(2)(C)(ii): (ii)       Conditions and               (ii) Conditions and          49(b)(2)(B)(ii): (ii)
Conditions and               Conditions and                Restrictions on Access.      Restrictions on Access.      Conditions and
Restrictions on Access.      Restrictions on Access.       A court may set and          A court may set and          Restrictions on Access.
A court may set and          A court may set and           enforce reasonable           enforce reasonable           A court may set and
enforce reasonable           enforce reasonable            conditions and               conditions and               enforce reasonable
conditions and               conditions and                restrictions on              restrictions on              conditions and
restrictions on              restrictions on               unrepresented parties’       unrepresented parties’       restrictions on self-
unrepresented                unrepresented                 access to the court’s        access to the court’s        represented parties’
individuals’ access to the   individuals’ access to the    electronic-ﬁling system      electronic-ﬁling system      access to the court’s
court’s electronic-ﬁling     court’s electronic-ﬁling      (including by denying or     (including by denying or     electronic-ﬁling system
system (including by         system (including by          revoking access for a        revoking access for a        (including by denying or
denying or revoking          denying or revoking           particular unrepresented     particular unrepresented     revoking access for a
access for a particular      access for a particular       party). But the court may    party). But the court may    particular self-
unrepresented                unrepresented                 not prohibit all             not prohibit all             represented party). But
individual). But the court   individual). But the court    unrepresented parties        unrepresented parties        the court may not
may not prohibit all         may not prohibit all          from using the system        from using the system        prohibit all self-
unrepresented                unrepresented                 unless that prohibition      unless that prohibition      represented parties from
individuals from using the   individuals from using the    includes reasonable          includes reasonable          using the system unless
system unless that           system unless that            exceptions or the court      exceptions or the court      that prohibition includes
prohibition includes         prohibition includes          permits the use of           permits the use of           reasonable exceptions or
reasonable exceptions or     reasonable exceptions or      another electronic           another electronic           the court permits the use
the court permits the use    the court permits the use     method for ﬁling papers      method for ﬁling papers      of another electronic
of another electronic        of another electronic         and receiving electronic     and receiving electronic     method for ﬁling papers
method for ﬁling papers      method for ﬁling              notice of activity in the    notice of activity in the    and receiving electronic
and receiving electronic     documents and receiving       party’s case.                party’s case.                notice of activity in the
notice of activity in the    electronic notice of                                                                    party’s case.
case.                        activity in the case.




                                                                                                                                                 3

     Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                                                         Page 23 of 209
     August 2026
E-ﬁling & signature:          E-ﬁling & signature:             E-ﬁling & signature:         E-ﬁling & signature:         E-ﬁling & signature:
Bankruptcy Rule               Bankruptcy Rule 8011(e):         FRAP 25(a)(2)(D): (D)        Civil Rule 5(d)(2)(C): (C)   Criminal Rule 49(b)(2)(D):
5005(a)(3)(C): (C)            (e) Signature Always             Signing. A ﬁling made        Signing. A ﬁling made        (D) Signature. A ﬁling
Signing. A ﬁling made         Required.                        through a person's           through a person's           made through a person's
through an individual’s       (1) Electronic Filing.           electronic-ﬁling account     electronic-ﬁling account     electronic-ﬁling account
electronic-ﬁling account      Every document ﬁled              and authorized by that       and authorized by that       and authorized by that
and authorized by that        electronically must              person, together with that   person, together with that   person, together with the
individual, together with     include the electronic           person's name on a           person's name on a           person's name on a
the individual’s name on      signature of the individual      signature block,             signature block,             signature block,
a signature block,            ﬁling it or, if an entity is     constitutes the person's     constitutes the person's     constitutes the person's
constitutes the               represented, the                 signature.                   signature.                   signature.
individual’s signature.       counsel's electronic
                              signature. A ﬁling made
                              through an individual’s
                              electronic-ﬁling account
                              and authorized by that
                              individual—together with
                              that individual’s name on
                              a signature block—
                              constitutes the
                              individual’s signature.
                              (2) Paper Filing. Every
                              document ﬁled in paper
                              form must be signed by
                              the individual ﬁling it or, if
                              an entity is represented,
                              by the entity’s counsel.




                                                                                                                                                      4

      Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                                                             Page 24 of 209
      August 2026
Service required:            Service required:             Service required:             Service required:            Service required:
[NB: No need to revise       Rule 8011(b): (b) Service     FRAP 25(b): (b) Service       [NB: No need to revise       [NB: No need to revise
Rule 5005(b) (“Sending       of All Documents              of All Papers Required.       Civil Rule 5(a) (“Service:   Criminal Rule 49(a)(1)
Copies to the United         Required. Unless a rule       Unless a rule requires        When Required”),             (“Service on a Party.
States Trustee”), because    requires service by the       service by the clerk or the   because it does not          What is Required”),
it does not specify that     clerk or the document         paper will be served          specify that service must    because it does not
sending must be “at or       will be served through the    through the court’s           be “at or before the time    specify that service must
before the time of ﬁling.”   court’s electronic-ﬁling      electronic-ﬁling system       of ﬁling.”]                  be “at or before the time
Rule 9036 does not           system under (c)(1), a        under Rule 25(c)(1), a                                     of ﬁling.”]
include a provision          party must, at or before      party must, at or before
requiring service.]          the time of the ﬁling of a    the time of ﬁling a paper,
                             document, serve it on the     serve a copy on the other
                             other parties to the          parties to the appeal or
                             appeal. Service on a          review. Service on a party
                             party represented by          represented by counsel
                             counsel must be made          must be made on the
                             on the party's counsel.       party's counsel.




                                                                                                                                                  5

     Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                                                           Page 25 of 209
     August 2026
Service by NCA:                 Service by NCA:                 Service by NCA:                 Service by NCA:                 Service by NCA:
Rule 9036(c)(1): (c)            Rule 8011(c)(1): (c)            FRAP 25(c)(1): (c)              Civil Rule 5(b)(2): (b)         Criminal Rule 49(a)(3):
Notices from and                Manner of Service.              Manner of Service.              Service: How Made.…             (3) Service by a Notice
Service by an Entity. (1)       (1) Service by a Notice         (1) Service by a Notice         (2) Service by a Notice of      of Case Activity Sent
Notice of Case Activity         of Case Activity Sent           of Case Activity Sent           Case Activity Sent              Through the Court’s
Sent Through the                Through the Court’s             Through the Court’s             Through the Court’s             Electronic-Filing
Court’s Electronic-Filing       Electronic-Filing               Electronic-Filing               Electronic-Filing System.       System. A notice of case
System. A notice of case        System. A notice of case        System. A notice of case        A notice of case activity       activity sent to a person
activity sent to an entity      activity sent to an entity      activity sent to a person       sent to a person registered     registered to receive it
registered to receive it        registered to receive it        registered to receive it        to receive it through the       through the court’s
through the court’s             through the court’s             through the court’s             court’s electronic-ﬁling        electronic-ﬁling system
electronic-ﬁling system         electronic-ﬁling system         electronic-ﬁling system         system constitutes              constitutes service on
constitutes notice or           constitutes service on          constitutes service on          service on that person. For     that person. For any
service on that entity,         that entity, with these         that person, with these         any service deadlines,          service deadlines,
with these qualiﬁcations:       qualiﬁcations:                  qualiﬁcations:                  service by a notice of case     service by a notice of
(A) such notice or service      (A) such service is not         (A) such service is not         activity is complete as of      case activity is complete
is not e ective if the ﬁler     e ective if the ﬁler learns     e ective if the ﬁler learns     the date of ﬁling. For any      as of the date of ﬁling. For
learns that it did not          that it did not reach the       that it did not reach the       deadlines that run from         any deadlines that run
reach the entity to be          entity to be served; and        person to be served; and        the date of service, service    from the date of service,
notiﬁed or served; and          (B) a court may provide by      (B) a court may provide by      by a notice of case activity    service by a notice of
(B) a court may provide by      order or local rule that if a   order or local rule that if a   is complete as of the           case activity is complete
order or local rule that if a   document is ﬁled under          paper is ﬁled under seal        notice’s date. But these        as of the notice’s date.
document is ﬁled under          seal, it must be served by      or initiates a proceeding       qualiﬁcations apply:            But these qualiﬁcations
seal, neither service nor       other means.                    in the court of appeals         (A) such service is not         apply:
notice occurs under this                                        under Rule 5, 6(c), 15, or      e ective if the ﬁler learns     (A) such service is not
paragraph (c)(1).                                               21, it must be served by        that it did not reach the       e ective if the ﬁler learns
                                                                other means.                    person to be served; and        that it did not reach the
                                                                                                (B) a court may provide by      person to be served; and
                                                                                                order or local rule that if a   (B) a court may provide
                                                                                                paper is ﬁled under seal, it    by order or local rule that
                                                                                                must be served by other         if a paper is ﬁled under
                                                                                                means.                          seal, it must be served by
                                                                                                                                other means.
                                                                                                                                                           6

      Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                                                                   Page 26 of 209
      August 2026
Service / other                Service / other means:        Service / other means:       Service / other means:       Service / other means:
electronic means:
[NB: Rule 9036 focuses         Rule 8011(c)(2): (2)          FRAP 25(c)(2): (2)           Civil Rule 5(b)(3): (3)      Criminal Rule 49(a)(4):
on electronic notice &         Service by Other Means.       Service by Other Means.      Service by Other Means.      (4) Service by Other
service, so its “other         A document may also be        A paper may also be          A paper may also be          Means. A paper may also
means” provision focuses       served under this rule by:    served under this rule by:   served under this rule by:   be served by:
only on other electronic       (A) personal delivery;        (A) personal delivery,       (A) handing it to the        (A) handing it to the
means.] Rule 9036(c)(2):       (B) mail;                     including delivery to a      person;                      person;
(2) Electronic Means           (C) third-party               responsible person at the    (B) leaving it:              (B) leaving it:
Consented To. An entity        commercial carrier for        o ice of counsel;            (i) at the person’s o ice    (i) at the person's o ice
may also send notice or        delivery within 3 days; or    (B) mail;                    with a clerk or other        with a clerk or other
serve a document by            (D) electronic means that     (C) third-party              person in charge or, if no   person in charge or, if no
electronic means that the      the entity served has         commercial carrier for       one is in charge, in a       one is in charge, in a
recipient consented to in      consented to in writing,      delivery within 3 days; or   conspicuous place in the     conspicuous place in the
writing, including by          but such electronic           (D) sending it by            o ice; or                    o ice; or
designating an electronic      service is not e ective if    electronic means that the     (ii) if the person has no   (ii) if the person has no
address for receiving          the sender learns that it     person to be served has      o ice or the o ice is        o ice or the o ice is
notices. But such notice       did not reach the entity to   consented to in writing,     closed, at the person’s      closed, at the person's
or service is not e ective     be served.                    but such electronic          dwelling or usual place of   dwelling or usual place of
if the sender learns that it                                 service is not e ective if   abode with someone of        abode with someone of
did not reach the entity to                                  the sender learns that it    suitable age and             suitable age and
be notiﬁed or served.                                        did not reach the person     discretion who resides       discretion who resides
                                                             to be served.                there;                       there;
                                                                                          (C) mailing it to the        (C) mailing it to the
                                                                                          person’s last known          person's last known
                                                                                          address—in which event       address – in which event
                                                                                          service is complete upon     service is complete upon
                                                                                          mailing;                     mailing;
                                                                                          (D) leaving it with the      (D) leaving it with the
                                                                                          court clerk if the person    court clerk if the person
                                                                                          has no known address;        has no known address;
                                                                                                                                                    7

      Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                                                           Page 27 of 209
      August 2026
                                                                (E) sending it by            (E) sending it by
                                                                electronic means that the    electronic means that the
                                                                person has consented to      person has consented to
                                                                in writing—in which event    in writing – in which event
                                                                service is complete upon     service is complete upon
                                                                sending, but is not          sending, but is not
                                                                e ective if the sender       e ective if the sender
                                                                learns that it did not       learns that it did not
                                                                reach the person to be       reach the person to be
                                                                served; or                   served; or
                                                                 (F) delivering it by any    (F) delivering it by any
                                                                other means that the         other means that the
                                                                person has consented to      person has consented to
                                                                in writing—in which event    in writing—in which event
                                                                service is complete when     service is complete when
                                                                the person making            the person making
                                                                service delivers it to the   service delivers it to the
                                                                agency designated to         agency designated to
                                                                make delivery.               make delivery.




                                                                                                                       8

Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                                       Page 28 of 209
August 2026
Service / completeness:        Service / completeness:      Service / completeness:      Service / completeness:        Service / completeness:
Rule 9036(d): (d) When         Rule 8011(c)(3): (3)         FRAP 25(c)(4): (4) When      [Civil Rule 5 does not         [Criminal Rule 49 does
Notice or Service Is           When Service Is              Service Is Complete.         have a discrete subpart        not have a discrete
Complete; Keeping an           Complete.                    (A) For Service by Mail or   focused on                     subpart focused on
Address Current.               (A) For Service by a         Commercial Carrier.          completeness. Rather,          completeness. Rather,
(1) Notice of Case             Notice of Case Activity.     Service by mail or by        the current rule               the current rule
Activity Sent Through          For any service              commercial carrier is        addresses completeness         addresses completeness
the Court’s Electronic-        deadlines, service by a      complete on mailing or       in Rule 5(b)(2)(C), (E), and   in Rules 49(a)(3)(A) & (B)
Filing System.                 notice of case activity is   delivery to the carrier.     (F). The amended rule          and 49(a)(4)(C) & (E). The
For any notice or service      complete as of the date      (B) For Service by a         retains those mentions of      amended rule retains
deadlines, notice or           of ﬁling. For any            Notice of Case Activity.     completeness and               (though relocates) three
service by a notice of         deadlines that run from      For any service              addresses completeness         of these mentions of
case activity is complete      the date of service,         deadlines, service by a      for service by means of        completeness and
as of the date of ﬁling. For   service by a notice of       notice of case activity is   the NCA in Rule 5(b)(2).]      addresses completeness
any deadlines that run         case activity is complete    complete as of the date      Civil Rule 5(b)(2): For any    for service by means of
from the date of notice or     as of the notice’s date.     of ﬁling. For any            service deadlines,             the NCA in Rule 49(a)(3).]
service, notice or service     (B) For Service by Other     deadlines that run from      service by a notice of         Criminal Rule 49(a)(3):
by a notice of case            Electronic Means.            the date of service,         case activity is complete      For any service
activity is complete as of     Service by other             service by a notice of       as of the date of ﬁling. For   deadlines, service by a
the date of the notice of      electronic means is          case activity is complete    any deadlines that run         notice of case activity is
case activity.                 complete on sending.         as of the notice’s date.     from the date of service,      complete as of the date
(2) Other Electronic           (C) For Service by Mail      (C) For Service by Other     service by a notice of         of ﬁling. For any
Means. Electronic notice       or Commercial Carrier.       Electronic Means.            case activity is complete      deadlines that run from
or service by other            Service by mail or by        Service by other             as of the notice’s date.       the date of service,
electronic means is            third-party commercial       electronic means is                                         service by a notice of
complete upon sending.         carrier is complete on       complete on sending.                                        case activity is complete
                               mailing or delivery to the                                                               as of the notice’s date.
                               carrier.




                                                                                                                                                 9

      Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                                                            Page 29 of 209
      August 2026
NCA deﬁned:                  NCA deﬁned:                   NCA deﬁned:                 NCA deﬁned:                 NCA deﬁned:
Rule 9036(c)(3): (3)         Rule 8011(c)(4): (4)          FRAP 25(c)(5): (5)          Civil Rule 5(b)(4): (4)     Crim Rule 49(a)(5): (5)
Deﬁnition of “Notice of      Deﬁnition of “Notice of       Deﬁnition of “Notice of     Deﬁnition of “Notice of     Deﬁnition of “Notice of
Case Activity.” The term     Case Activity.” The term      Case Activity.” The term    Case Activity.” The term    Case Activity.” The term
“notice of case activity”    “notice of case activity”     “notice of case activity”   “notice of case activity”   “notice of case activity”
includes a notice of         includes a notice of          includes a notice of        includes a notice of        includes a notice of
docket activity, a notice    docket activity, a notice     docket activity, a notice   docket activity, a notice   docket activity, a notice
of electronic ﬁling, and     of electronic ﬁling, and      of electronic ﬁling, and    of electronic ﬁling, and    of electronic ﬁling, and
any other similar            any other similar             any other similar           any other similar           any other similar
electronic notice            electronic notice             electronic notice           electronic notice           electronic notice
provided to case             provided to case              provided to case            provided to case            provided to case
participants through the     participants through the      participants through the    participants through the    participants through the
court’s electronic-ﬁling     court’s electronic-ﬁling      court’s electronic-ﬁling    court’s electronic-ﬁling    court’s electronic-ﬁling
system to inform them of     system to inform them of      system to inform them of    system to inform them of    system to inform them of
activity on the docket.      activity on the docket.       activity on the docket.     activity on the docket.     activity on the docket.




                                                                                                                                           10

     Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                                                        Page 30 of 209
     August 2026
Certiﬁcate of service:       Certiﬁcate of service:        Certiﬁcate of service:       Certiﬁcate of service:            Certiﬁcate of service:
[NB: Rule 5005 doesn’t       [NB: The overarching SRL      [NB: No need to revise       Civil Rule 5(d)(1)(B): (B)        Criminal Rule 49(b)(1):
discuss service, and         project does not give rise    FRAP 25(d)(1) (“Proof of     Certiﬁcate of Service.            (b) Filing.
while Rule 9036              to a need to revise Rule      Service”), because it        No certiﬁcate of service          (1) When Required;
addresses service, it does   8011(d)(1) (“Proof of         already uses the             is required when a paper          Certiﬁcate of Service.
not address proof of         Service. Requirements”),      language “if it was served   is served through the             Any paper that is required
service.]                    because it already uses       other than through the       court’s electronic-ﬁling          to be served must be ﬁled
                             the language “if it was       court's electronic-ﬁling     system under Rule                 no later than a
                             served other than through     system,” thus                5(b)(2). When a paper             reasonable time after
                             the court's electronic-       accommodating service        that is required to be            service. No certiﬁcate of
                             ﬁling system,” thus           (by means of the notice of   served is served by other         service is required when
                             accommodating service         case activity) of a ﬁling    means:                            a paper is served through
                             (by means of the notice of    made in paper form by a      (i) if it is ﬁled, a certiﬁcate   the court’s electronic-
                             case activity) of a ﬁling     SRL.]                        of service must be ﬁled           ﬁling system under Rule
                             made in paper form by a                                    with it or within a               49(a)(3). When a paper is
                             SRL. However, based on                                     reasonable time after             served by other means, a
                             its review of bankruptcy-                                  service; and                      certiﬁcate of service
                             speciﬁc terminology, the                                   (ii) if it is not ﬁled, a         must be ﬁled with it or
                             Bankruptcy Rules                                           certiﬁcate of service             within a reasonable time
                             Committee will update                                      need not be ﬁled, unless          after service or ﬁling.
                             Rule 8011(d)(1) to use the                                 ﬁling is required by court
                             terms “entity” and                                         order or by local rule.
                             “individual” instead of
                             “person.”]




                                                                                                                                                  11

     Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                                                               Page 31 of 209
     August 2026
                                         OVERVIEW:


            Proposals Relating to Privacy Rules in Public Court Filings




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules        Page 32 of 209
August 2026
                         May 11, 2026 Report on the Privacy Rule Amendments



                                           MEMORANDUM

To:      Judge James C. Dever III
         Standing Committee on Rules of Practice and Procedure

From: Carolyn Dubay, Chief Counsel, Rules Committee Staff
      Edward Hartnett, Standing Committee Reporter

Date: May 11, 2026

Re:      Report on Status of Privacy Rule Amendments


       The Standing Committee is asked to approve for publication and public comment proposed
amendments to the privacy rules found in Civil Rule 5.2, Criminal Rule 49.1, and Bankruptcy Rule
9037. Redlined versions of the proposed amended rules are included following this memorandum.
These amendments reflect years of study and coordination, with the Criminal Rules Advisory
Committee taking the lead on these issues and the Bankruptcy Rules Advisory Committee
considering the special need for at least partially redacted taxpayer identification numbers in
bankruptcy proceedings. The proposed changes, which stem from suggestions received from
Senator Ron Wyden in 2022 and the Department of Justice in 2024, would do the following:

      (1) Require complete redaction of social security numbers (SSNs), individual taxpayer
          identification numbers (ITINs) and employer identification numbers (EINs) in civil and
          criminal cases (Civil Rule 5.2 and Criminal Rule 49.1), subject to the existing exceptions
          in those Rules. These changes would expand the privacy protections in these rules in two
          ways. First, the current redaction requirement permits the inclusion of the last four digits
          of these numbers; the proposed amendments would require complete redaction. Second,
          EINs are not expressly covered by the existing rules, although redaction of EINs is required
          in U.S. Tax Court and in the Court of Federal Claims. However, for reasons explained in
          the Bankruptcy Rules Advisory Committee Report to the Standing Committee in January
          2026, Bankruptcy Rule 9037 would not change with respect to social security numbers or
          taxpayer identification numbers and would not expand to protect employer identification
          numbers.

      (2) Require the use of pseudonyms rather than initials to reference minors in court filings in
          civil, criminal, and bankruptcy cases (Civil Rule 5.2, Criminal Rule 49.1, Bankruptcy Rule
          9037). Note that the proposed amendments do not address the use of a pseudonym for a
          minor in a court filing once the minor ages out, but public comment may provide insight
          into whether this is an issue that should be addressed in a rule rather than through protective
          orders in individual cases.

      (3) In all three rule sets, clarify that the redaction/pseudonym requirement applies to all
          documents in the court filing, including exhibits and attachments.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                             Page 33 of 209
August 2026
                      May 11, 2026 Report on the Privacy Rule Amendments


        As an additional matter, the Bankruptcy Rules Advisory Committee at its spring 2026
meeting voted to approve for publication and public amendments to Rule 8011 governing
bankruptcy appeals. Those proposed amendments would add an additional layer of privacy
protection in appeals from bankruptcy courts to district courts and bankruptcy appellate panels.
These proposed amendments were intended to mirror amendments that the Appellate Rules
Advisory Committee is considering with respect to Appellate Rule 25(a)(5). At its spring Advisory
Committee meeting, however, the Appellate Rules Committee determined that further study was
needed regarding those proposed amendments and it is not seeking publication at this time of
proposed amendments to Rule 25(a)(5). For this reason, we recommend that the Standing
Committee postpone publication and public comment on the proposed amendments to Bankruptcy
Rule 8011 to allow for coordination with the Appellate Rules Advisory Committee as it continues
to study the issue.

       Importantly, the delay in moving forward with the appellate privacy rules (Bankruptcy Rule
8011 and Appellate Rule 25(a)(5)) should not delay publication for public comment of the
proposed amendments to Civil Rule 5.2, Criminal Rule 49.1, and Bankruptcy Rule 9037. Existing
Appellate Rule 25(a)(5) incorporates those Rules by reference, so any changes to those Rules will
apply on appeal without the need to amend Appellate Rule 25(a)(5). For reference, that Rule
provides:

       Privacy Protection. An appeal in a case whose privacy protection was governed by Federal
       Rule of Bankruptcy Procedure 9037, Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 5.2, or Federal Rule
       of Criminal Procedure 49.1 is governed by the same rule on appeal. In all other
       proceedings, privacy protection is governed by Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 5.2, except
       that Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 49.1 governs when an extraordinary writ is sought
       in a criminal case. The provisions on remote electronic access in Federal Rule of Civil
       Procedure 5.2(c)(1) and (2) apply in a petition for review of a benefits decision of the
       Railroad Retirement Board under the Railroad Retirement Act.

        The amendments to Appellate Rule 25(a)(5) that the Advisory Committee on Appellate
Rules has been considering would add another layer of privacy protection on appeal, requiring
redactions in appellate filings even of material that need not be redacted under the Civil, Criminal,
and Bankruptcy Rules. It was poised to ask the Standing Committee to publish a proposal along
these lines but, at its April 2026 meeting, new concerns were raised about the breadth and impact
of that proposal. In particular, the U.S. Department of Justice (echoed by others) raised concerns
about the costs and difficulties involved in redacting the contents of an appendix. The possibility
that a party might forfeit this additional layer of protection was also raised. Recognizing that any
changes made to the Civil, Criminal, and Bankruptcy Rules will automatically flow through to the
courts of appeals, the Advisory Committee on Appellate Rules decided to study these concerns
further before seeking to impose another layer of protection, and it formed a subcommittee to do
so. Any changes it considers can also be shared with the Bankruptcy Rules Advisory Committee
regarding parallel amendments to Bankruptcy Rule 8011.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                         Page 34 of 209
August 2026
            FEDERAL RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules   Page 35 of 209
August 2026
           Excerpt from the May 11, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Appellate Rules


                       COMMITTEE ON RULES OF PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
                                                    OF THE
                           JUDICIAL CONFERENCE OF THE UNITED STATES
                                     WASHINGTON, D.C. 20544

JAMES C. DEVER III                                                           CHAIRS OF ADVISORY COMMITTEES
     CHAIR
                                                                                      ALLISON H. EID
CAROLYN A. DUBAY                                                                     APPELLATE RULES
   SECRETARY
                                                                                   REBECCA B. CONNELLY
                                                                                    BANKRUPTCY RULES

                                                                                     SARAH S. VANCE
                                                                                       CIVIL RULES

                                                                                   MICHAEL W. MOSMAN
                                                                                     CRIMINAL RULES

                                                                                     JESSE M. FURMAN
                                                                                      EVIDENCE RULES



                                          MEMORANDUM

    TO:         Hon. James C. Dever III, Chair
                Committee on Rules of Practice and Procedure

    FROM: Hon. Allison H. Eid, Chair
          Advisory Committee on Appellate Rules

    RE:         Report of the Advisory Committee on Appellate Rules

    DATE:       May 11, 2026


    I.      Introduction

          The Advisory Committee on Appellate Rules met on Thursday, April 16, 2026,
    in Charlotte, North Carolina. * * *

            The Advisory Committee has several action items for the June 2026 meeting.

                                                 *****

           In addition, the Advisory Committee asks the Standing Committee to publish
    for public comment (per Part III of this report) proposed amendments to Rule 25, as
    part of the cross-committee project to address electronic filing by self-represented lit-
    igants.



    Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                    Page 36 of 209
    August 2026
       Excerpt from the May 11, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Appellate Rules


                                             *****

III.   Item for Publication

       A.      Electronic Filing and Service by Self-Represented Parties (21-
               AP-E)

       The Advisory Committee defers to the Consultant to the Standing Committee
for the update regarding the joint project on electronic filing and service by self-rep-
resented litigants.

                                             *****




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                    Page 37 of 209
August 2026
                             PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE
                        FEDERAL RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE 1


                  1    Rule 25.          Filing and Service

                  2    (a)     Filing.

                  3            (1)       Filing with the Clerk. A paper required or

                  4                      permitted to be filed in a court of appeals

                  5                      must be filed with the clerk.

                  6            (2)       Filing: Method and Timeliness.

                  7                      (A)    Nonelectronic Filing.

                  8                             (i)     In General. For a paper not

                  9                                     filed electronically, filing may

                10                                      be accomplished by mail

                11                                      addressed to the clerk, but

                12                                      filing is not timely unless the

                13                                      clerk receives the papers

                14                                      within the time fixed for



                               1
                                  New material is underlined in red; matter to be omitted
                       is lined through.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                               Page 38 of 209
August 2026
                       2       FEDERAL RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE




                15                                    filing.

                16                            (ii)    A Brief or Appendix. A brief

                17                                    or     appendix         not        filed

                18                                    electronically is timely filed,

                19                                    however, if on or before the

                20                                    last day for filing, it is:

                21                                    •    mailed to the clerk by

                22                                         first-class mail, or other

                23                                         class of mail that is at least

                24                                         as expeditious, postage

                25                                         prepaid; or

                26                                    •    dispatched to a third-party

                27                                         commercial       carrier        for

                28                                         delivery    to     the        clerk

                29                                         within 3 days.

                30                            (iii)   Inmate        Filing.         If     an

                31                                    institution     has     a      system

                32                                    designed for legal mail, an




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                                    Page 39 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE                        3




                33                                   inmate confined there must

                34                                   use that system to receive the

                35                                   benefit    of     this    Rule

                36                                   25(a)(2)(A)(iii). A paper not

                37                                   filed electronically by an

                38                                   inmate is timely if it is

                39                                   deposited in the institution’s

                40                                   internal mail system on or

                41                                   before the last day for filing

                42                                   and:

                43                                   •   it is accompanied by: a

                44                                       declaration in compliance

                45                                       with 28 U.S.C. § 1746—

                46                                       or a notarized statement—

                47                                       setting out the date of

                48                                       deposit and stating that

                49                                       first-class postage is being

                50                                       prepaid; or evidence (such




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                           Page 40 of 209
August 2026
                       4       FEDERAL RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE




                51                                           as a postmark or date

                52                                           stamp) showing that the

                53                                           paper was so deposited

                54                                           and that postage was

                55                                           prepaid; or

                56                                   •       the   court   of     appeals

                57                                           exercises its discretion to

                58                                           permit the later filing of a

                59                                           declaration or notarized

                60                                           statement that satisfies

                61                                           Rule 25(a)(2)(A)(iii).

                62                    (B)     Electronic Filing and Signing.

                63                            (i) By by a Represented Person

                64                            Represented           by       Counsel—

                65                            Generally Required; Exceptions. A

                66                            person represented by an attorney

                67                            must    file      electronically,    unless

                68                            nonelectronic filing is allowed by the




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                               Page 41 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE                          5




                69                            court for good cause or is allowed or

                70                            required by local rule.

                71                    (ii)(C) Electronic    Filing       by   By   an

                72                            Unrepresented       Person      Party—

                73                            When Allowed or Required.

                74                            (i)    In          General.          An

                75                                   unrepresented party person

                76                                   not    represented       by    an

                77                                   attorney:       •    may      file

                78                                   electronically only if allowed

                79                                   by use the court’s electronic-

                80                                   filing system to file papers

                81                                   and receive notice of activity

                82                                   in the party’s case, unless a

                83                                   court order or by local rule

                84                                   prohibits the party from doing

                85                                   so.; and • An unrepresented

                86                                   person may be required to file




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                             Page 42 of 209
August 2026
                       6       FEDERAL RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE




                87                                   electronically only by court

                88                                   order in a case, or by a local

                89                                   rule that includes reasonable

                90                                   exceptions.

                91                            (ii)   Conditions and Restrictions

                92                                   on Access. A court may set

                93                                   and        enforce      reasonable

                94                                   conditions and restrictions on

                95                                   unrepresented parties’ access

                96                                   to the court’s electronic-filing

                97                                   system (including by denying

                98                                   or revoking access for a

                99                                   particular           unrepresented

               100                                   party). But the court may not

               101                                   prohibit     all     unrepresented

               102                                   parties from using the system

               103                                   unless       that      prohibition

               104                                   includes                reasonable




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                             Page 43 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE                           7




               105                                   exceptions      or   the      court

               106                                   permits the use of another

               107                                   electronic method for filing

               108                                   papers         and      receiving

               109                                   electronic notice of activity in

               110                                   the party’s case.

               111                    (iii)(D) Signing. A filing made through a

               112                            person’s electronic-filing account and

               113                            authorized by that person, together

               114                            with that person’s name on a

               115                            signature   block,     constitutes     the

               116                            person’s signature.

               117                    (iv)(E) Same as a Written Paper. A paper

               118                            filed electronically is a written paper

               119                            for purposes of these rules.

               120                               *****

               121     (b)    Service of All Papers Required. Unless a rule

               122            requires service by the clerk or the paper will be




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                              Page 44 of 209
August 2026
                       8       FEDERAL RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE




               123            served through the court’s electronic-filing system

               124            under Rule 25(c)(1), a party must, at or before the

               125            time of filing a paper, serve a copy on the other

               126            parties to the appeal or review. Service on a party

               127            represented by counsel must be made on the party’s

               128            counsel.

               129     (c)    Manner of Service.

               130            (1)     Service by a Notice of Case Activity Sent

               131                    Through the Court’s Electronic-Filing

               132                    System. A notice of case activity sent to a

               133                    person registered to receive it through the

               134                    court’s electronic-filing system constitutes

               135                    service     on    that    person,    with     these

               136                    qualifications:

               137                    (A)       such service is not effective if the filer

               138                              learns that it did not reach the person

               139                              to be served; and

               140                    (B)       a court may provide by order or local




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                                Page 45 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE                         9




               141                            rule that if a paper is filed under seal

               142                            or initiates a proceeding in the court

               143                            of appeals under Rule 5, 6(c), 15, or

               144                            21, it must be served by other means.

               145            (2)     Service by Other Means. A paper may also

               146                    be served under this rule by:

               147            Nonelectronic service may be any of the following:

               148                    (A)     personal delivery, including delivery

               149                            to a responsible person at the office of

               150                            counsel;

               151                    (B)     by mail; or

               152                    (C)     by third-party commercial carrier for

               153                            delivery within 3 days; or

               154                    (D) . (2) Electronic service of a paper may be

               155                            made (A) by sending it to a registered

               156                            user by filing it with the court’s

               157                            electronic-filing system or (B) by

               158                            sending it by other electronic means




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                            Page 46 of 209
August 2026
                       10       FEDERAL RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE




               159                            that the person to be served has

               160                            consented to in writing., but such

               161                            electronic service is not effective if

               162                            the sender learns that it did not reach

               163                            the person to be served.

               164            (3)     Considerations in Choosing Other Means.

               165                    When reasonable considering such factors as

               166                    the immediacy of the relief sought, distance,

               167                    and cost, service on a party must be by a

               168                    manner at least as expeditious as the manner

               169                    used to file the paper with the court.

               170            (4)     When Service Is Complete.

               171                    (A)     For Service by Mail or Commercial

               172                            Carrier. Service by mail or by

               173                            commercial carrier is complete on

               174                            mailing or delivery to the carrier.

               175                    (B)     For Service by a Notice of Case

               176                            Activity. For any service deadlines,




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                           Page 47 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE                        11




               177                            service by a notice of case activity is

               178                            complete as of the date of filing. For

               179                            any deadlines that run from the date

               180                            of service, service by a notice of case

               181                            activity is complete as of the notice’s

               182                            date.

               183                    (C) For Service by Other Electronic

               184                            Means. Service by other electronic

               185                            means is complete on filing or

               186                            sending, unless the party making

               187                            service is notified that the paper was

               188                            not received by the party served.

               189            (5)     Definition of “Notice of Case Activity.”

               190                    The term “notice of case activity” includes a

               191                    notice of docket activity, a notice of

               192                    electronic filing, and any other similar

               193                    electronic      notice    provided   to     case

               194                    participants through the court’s electronic-




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                            Page 48 of 209
August 2026
                       12       FEDERAL RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE




               195                    filing system to inform them of activity on the

               196                    docket.

               197     (d)    Proof of Service.

               198            (1)     A paper presented for filing must contain

               199                    either of the following if it was served other

               200                    than through the court’s electronic-filing

               201                    system:

               202                    (A)       an acknowledgment of service by the

               203                              person served; or

               204                    (B)       proof of service consisting of a

               205                              statement by the person who made

               206                              service certifying:

               207                              (i)     the date and manner of

               208                                      service;

               209                              (ii)    the names of the persons

               210                                      served; and

               211                              (iii)   their   mail   or   electronic

               212                                      addresses, facsimile numbers,




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                            Page 49 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE                       13




               213                                    or the addresses of the places

               214                                    of delivery, as appropriate for

               215                                    the manner of service.

               216            (2)     When a brief or appendix is filed by mailing

               217                    or dispatch in accordance with Rule

               218                    25(a)(2)(A)(ii), the proof of service must also

               219                    state the date and manner by which the

               220                    document was mailed or dispatched to the

               221                    clerk.

               222            (3)     Proof of service may appear on or be affixed

               223                    to the papers filed.

               224                                *****

               225                             Committee Note

               226              Rule 25 is amended to address two topics concerning
               227     unrepresented parties. (Concurrent amendments are made to
               228     Bankruptcy Rules 5005, 8011, and 9036, Civil Rule 5, and
               229     Criminal Rule 49.) Rule 25(a)(2) is amended to expand the
               230     availability of electronic modes by which unrepresented
               231     parties can file documents with the court and receive notice
               232     of filings that others make in the case. Rule 25(c) is amended
               233     to address service of documents filed by an unrepresented
               234     litigant in paper form. Because all such paper filings are
               235     uploaded by court staff into the court’s electronic-filing




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                           Page 50 of 209
August 2026
                       14        FEDERAL RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE




               236     system, there is no need to require separate paper service by
               237     the filer on case participants who receive an electronic notice
               238     of the filing from the court’s electronic-filing system. Rule
               239     25(c)’s treatment of service is also reorganized to reflect the
               240     primacy of service by means of the electronic notice.

               241             Subdivision (a)(2)(C). Under new Rule
               242     25(a)(2)(C)(i), an unrepresented party is presumptively
               243     authorized to use the court’s electronic-filing system to file
               244     documents in the case. If a court of appeals wishes to restrict
               245     unrepresented parties’ access to the electronic-filing system,
               246     it must do so by order or local rule. This presumption in favor
               247     of access by unrepresented parties is the opposite of the
               248     presumption set by the prior Rule 25(a)(2)(B)(ii). The
               249     reference to an unrepresented ‘party,’ rather than an
               250     unrepresented ‘person,’ excludes an unrepresented nonparty
               251     from its scope; the rule does not grant nonparty nonlawyers
               252     any right to use the court’s e-filing system. However, the
               253     court may not require electronic filing by any unrepresented
               254     person, including any unrepresented nonparty, except by
               255     order in a particular case or by a local rule that includes
               256     reasonable exceptions.

               257             New Rule 25(a)(2)(C)(ii) states that the court may set
               258     reasonable conditions and restrictions on access by
               259     unrepresented parties to the court’s electronic-filing system.
               260     Where appropriate, access to the electronic-filing system
               261     might be allowed only to a particular type of unrepresented
               262     party: for example, one who is not incarcerated (if the
               263     distinctive logistical considerations that apply in carceral
               264     settings justify such a limitation), one who has satisfactorily
               265     completed required training and certifications, one who
               266     complies with other reasonable conditions on access, and so
               267     on. Reasonable conditions or restrictions might also
               268     distinguish between particular types of filings: for example,
               269     filings that initiate a case in the court of appeals and those




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                            Page 51 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE                         15




               270     that do not. The subdivision explicitly contemplates that, in
               271     appropriate circumstances, a reasonable restriction might
               272     also include an order barring a specific unrepresented party
               273     from accessing the court’s electronic-filing system or
               274     revoking that party’s access to the system.

               275             However, new Rule 25(a)(2)(C)(ii) also expressly
               276     prohibits a court from barring all unrepresented parties from
               277     using the electronic-filing system, unless the court also
               278     either (1) includes reasonable exceptions to the prohibition,
               279     or (2) permits unrepresented parties to use another electronic
               280     method for filing documents (such as by email or by upload
               281     through an electronic document submission system) and for
               282     receiving notice of court filings and orders (such as an
               283     electronic noticing program). A local provision requiring
               284     unrepresented parties to obtain the court’s permission in
               285     order to use the court’s electronic-filing system would count
               286     as including reasonable exceptions, so long as such
               287     permission is granted or withheld in accordance with the
               288     reasonable conditions and restrictions on access set by the
               289     court.

               290            Former Rules 25(a)(2)(B)(iii) and (iv) are carried
               291     forward but renumbered as Rules 25(a)(2)(D) and (E).

               292             Subdivision (b). Former Rule 25(b) generally
               293     required that a party, “at or before the time of filing a paper,
               294     [must] serve a copy on the other parties to the appeal or
               295     review.” The former rule exempted from this requirement
               296     instances when “a rule requires service by the clerk.” The
               297     rule is amended to add a second exemption, for instances
               298     when “the paper will be served through the court’s
               299     electronic-filing system under Rule 25(c)(1).” This
               300     amendment reflects that new Rule 25(c)(1) encompasses
               301     service by the notice of case activity that results from the
               302     clerk’s uploading into the system a paper filing by an




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                             Page 52 of 209
August 2026
                       16        FEDERAL RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE




               303     unrepresented litigant. (As to when such service is complete,
               304     see subdivision (c)(4)(B).)

               305             Subdivision (c). Rule 25(c) is restructured so that the
               306     primary means of service – that is, service by means of the
               307     court’s electronic-filing system – is addressed first, in Rule
               308     25(c)(1). Former Rule 25(c)(1) becomes new Rule 25(c)(2),
               309     which continues to address alternative means of service.
               310     New Rule 25(c)(5) defines the term “notice of case activity”
               311     as any electronic notice provided to case participants through
               312     the court’s electronic-filing system to inform them of a filing
               313     or other activity on the docket.

               314              Subdivision (c)(1). Amended Rule 25(c)(1)
               315     eliminates the requirement of separate (paper) service on a
               316     litigant who is registered to receive a notice of case activity
               317     from the court’s electronic-filing system. Litigants who are
               318     registered to receive a notice of case activity include those
               319     litigants who are participating in the court’s electronic-filing
               320     system with respect to the case in question and also include
               321     those litigants who receive the notice because they have
               322     registered for a court-based electronic-noticing program.
               323     (Former Rule 25(c)(2)’s provision for service by “sending [a
               324     paper] to a registered user by filing it with the court’s
               325     electronic-filing system” had already eliminated the
               326     requirement of paper service on registered users of the
               327     court’s electronic-filing system by other registered users of
               328     the system; the amendment extends this exemption from
               329     paper service to those who file by a means other than through
               330     the court’s electronic-filing system.)

               331              New Rule 25(c)(1)(A) provides that service by
               332     means of the court’s electronic-filing system is not effective
               333     if the filer learns that it did not reach the person to be served.
               334     This provision carries forward the principle previously
               335     contained in former Rule 25(c)(4).




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                               Page 53 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE                        17




               336              New Rule 25(c)(1)(B) states that a court may provide
               337     by order or local rule that if a paper is filed under seal or
               338     initiates a proceeding in the court of appeals under Rule 5,
               339     6(c), 15, or 21, it must be served by other means. This
               340     sentence is designed to account for circuits (if any) in which
               341     parties in the case cannot access other participants’ sealed
               342     filings via the court’s electronic-filing system. It also
               343     accounts for circuits that permit the use of the court’s
               344     electronic-filing system to file case-initiating petitions but
               345     that do not wish to permit the filer to rely on the court’s
               346     electronic-filing system for service of such a petition. The
               347     rule does not set a national requirement that all case-
               348     initiating documents be served other than through the court’s
               349     electronic-filing system; a court of appeals may decide that,
               350     in some instances, service of such documents through the
               351     court’s electronic-filing system is an appropriate option.

               352            Subdivision (c)(2). Subdivision (c)(2) carries
               353     forward the contents of former Rule 25(c)(1), with three
               354     changes.

               355             The       subdivision’s     introductory       phrase
               356     (“Nonelectronic service may be any of the following”) is
               357     amended to read “A paper may also be served under this rule
               358     by.” This locution reflects the inclusion of other electronic
               359     means (apart from service through the court’s electronic-
               360     filing system) in new Rule 25(c)(2)(D) and also ensures that
               361     new Rule 25(c)(2) remains an option for serving any litigant,
               362     even one who receives notices of filing. This option might
               363     be useful to litigants who will be filing non-electronically
               364     but who wish to effect service on their opponents before the
               365     time when the court will have uploaded the filing into the
               366     court’s system (thus generating the notice of case activity).

               367             The prior reference to “sending [a paper] to a
               368     registered user by filing it with the court’s electronic-filing




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                            Page 54 of 209
August 2026
                       18        FEDERAL RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE




               369     system” is deleted, because this is now covered by new Rule
               370     25(c)(1).

               371             The concept that service by other electronic means is
               372     not effective if the sender learns that the document was not
               373     received by the person served – previously contained in prior
               374     Rule 25(c)(4) – is relocated to what now is Rule 25(c)(2)(D).

               375             Subdivision (c)(4). Amended subdivision (c)(4)
               376     carries forward the prior rule’s provisions that service by
               377     electronic means other than through the court’s electronic-
               378     filing system is complete on sending and that service by mail
               379     or by commercial carrier is complete on mailing or delivery
               380     to the carrier.

               381             As to service through the court’s electronic-filing
               382     system, the amended rule provides that service by a notice
               383     of case activity is complete as of the date of filing for
               384     purposes of any deadlines for making service. But the
               385     amended rule provides that, for purposes of any deadlines
               386     that run from the date of service, service is complete as of
               387     the date of the notice of case activity. Thus, the amended rule
               388     ensures that if there is a delay between the date the court
               389     receives a filing not made through the electronic-filing
               390     system and the date the court uploads that filing into the
               391     electronic-filing system, that delay will not diminish the time
               392     allowed to the party whose deadline runs from the date of
               393     service.

               394             In addition to providing when service was complete,
               395     former Rule 25(c)(4) addressed what happened if the person
               396     making electronic service learned that the document was not
               397     received by the person to be served. The latter is now
               398     addressed by new Rules 25(c)(1)(A) and (c)(2)(D), which
               399     provide that electronic service is not effective if the filer or
               400     sender learns that it did not reach the person to be served.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                             Page 55 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE                      19




               401             Subdivision (c)(5). New Rule 25(c)(5) defines the
               402     term “notice of case activity” as any electronic notice
               403     provided to case participants through the court’s electronic-
               404     filing system to inform them of a filing or other activity on
               405     the docket. There are two equivalent terms currently in use:
               406     Notice of Electronic Filing and Notice of Docket Activity.
               407     “Notice of case activity” is intended to encompass both of
               408     those terms, as well as any equivalent terms that may come
               409     into use in future. The word “electronic” is deleted as
               410     superfluous now that electronic filing is the default method.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                          Page 56 of 209
August 2026
          FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules   Page 57 of 209
August 2026
          Excerpt from the May 7, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Bankruptcy Rules


                        COMMITTEE ON RULES OF PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
                                                    OF THE
                            JUDICIAL CONFERENCE OF THE UNITED STATES
                                      WASHINGTON, D.C. 20544

JAMES C. DEVER III                                                                CHAIRS OF ADVISORY COMMITTEES
     CHAIR
                                                                                           ALLISON H. EID
CAROLYN A. DUBAY                                                                          APPELLATE RULES
   SECRETARY
                                                                                        REBECCA B. CONNELLY
                                                                                         BANKRUPTCY RULES

                                                                                           SARAH S. VANCE
                                                                                             CIVIL RULES

                                                                                        MICHAEL W. MOSMAN
                                                                                          CRIMINAL RULES

                                                                                           JESSE M. FURMAN
                                                                                            EVIDENCE RULES



                                            MEMORANDUM

    TO:              Hon. James C. Dever III, Chair
                     Committee on Rules of Practice and Procedure

    FROM:            Hon. Rebecca B. Connelly, Chair
                     Advisory Committee on Bankruptcy Rules

    RE:              Report of the Advisory Committee on Bankruptcy Rules

    DATE:            May 7, 2026


    I.      Introduction

            The Advisory Committee on Bankruptcy Rules met in Charlotte, N.C., on April 15, 2026.
    ***

                                                  *****

            In addition to the rules discussed in Professor Struve’s report on electronic filing and
    service by self-represented litigants, the Advisory Committee also agreed to seek publication for
    comment of proposed amendments to Bankruptcy Rules 2003 (Meeting of Creditors or Equity
    Security Holders) and 9037 (Privacy Protection for Filings Made With the Court).

            Part II of this report presents those action items. They are organized as follows:



    Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                         Page 58 of 209
    August 2026
      Excerpt from the May 7, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Bankruptcy Rules


                                             *****

B.     Items for Publication
       ●       Rule 2003; and
       ●       Rule 9037.
                                             *****
II.    Action Items

                                             *****

B.     Items for Publication

       The Advisory Committee recommends that the following rule amendments be
published for public comment in August 2026. Bankruptcy Tab 17 includes Rule 2003, and Rule
9037 is included in Ms. Dubay’s report on the privacy rules amendments.

        Action Item 4. Rule 2003 (Meeting of Creditors or Equity Security Holders). A chapter
12/chapter 13 trustee submitted a suggestion (Suggestion 24-BK-G), which she later revised
(Suggestion 25-BK-B), to amend Rule 2003 as pertains to the timing and location of meetings of
creditors. She made this suggestion, which was endorsed by the Association of Chapter 12 Trustees
(“ACT12”) and the National Association of Chapter 13 Trustees, in response to the current practice
of conducting the meetings remotely by means of Zoom. The National Association of Bankruptcy
Trustees (“NABT”) also submitted a suggestion (25-BK-C) to amend Rule 2003 to take account
of remote meetings of creditors.

        Because some of the concerns raised by the suggestions relate to policies of the Executive
Office for U.S. Trustees (“EOUST”), the Advisory Committee suggested that discussions between
that office and trustee representatives might be helpful in determining whether a consensus could
be reached about the need for possible amendments to Rule 2003. Those discussions took place,
and ACT 12 and NABT submitted new suggestions (26-BK-1 and 26-BK-2) that proposed
amendments to Rule 2003(a) that the EOUST and the trustee groups agreed on, plus an additional
amendment that the EOUST did not support.

        The Advisory Committee approved the proposed amendments for publication, with minor
changes suggested by the style consultants, and by a 10-4 vote rejected the language to which the
EOUST objected. These proposed amendments would allow more time to convene the meeting of
creditors in chapter 12 and 13 cases, extending the deadline in chapter 12 cases from 35 to 60 days,
and in chapter 13 cases, from 50 to 60 days, after the order for relief. They would also expressly
authorize meetings of creditors to be “conducted in person or remotely” and would allow the U.S.
trustee to designate in which manner a meeting would be conducted. The Advisory Committee
declined to add the sentence, “A remote meeting is deemed to take place in the district in which
the case was filed.”
      Action Item 5. Rule 9037 (Protecting Privacy for Filings). All the advisory committees
have been considering suggestions that address particular issues relating to the privacy rules,



Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                        Page 59 of 209
August 2026
      Excerpt from the May 7, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Bankruptcy Rules


including suggestions regarding redaction of social-security numbers (“SSNs”) in federal-court
filings and a suggestion relating to initials of known minors in court filings. The Advisory
Committee has approved for publication amendments to Rule 9037 that would extend the
protection of the rule to exhibits and attachments and would require the use of a pseudonym in
place of initials for an individual known to be and identified as a minor. It does not propose
amending the rule to require the complete redaction of SSNs. A Federal Judicial Center survey of
bankruptcy debtor attorneys; chapter 7, 12, and 13 trustees; creditor attorneys; various tax
authorities; and representatives of the National Association of Attorneys General revealed a need
for the last 4 SSN digits in order to associate filings with the correct individual. The Advisory
Committee also decided not to require the redaction of EINs, which the bankruptcy petition forms
currently require an employer-debtor to provide. These numbers are used to monitor repeat filings,
and the Advisory Committee was unaware of any demonstrated need for redacting them.

       The Advisory Committee has also approved for publication a new Rule 8011(a)(4) that
would require full redaction of SSNs or other taxpayer-identification numbers—including EINs—
from any filing made in appeals from the bankruptcy court to the district court or bankruptcy
appellate panel. These amendments were drafted to parallel amendments to Appellate Rule 25,
which the Appellate Rules Advisory Committee has been considering. However, in light of that
committee’s continuing consideration of those amendments, the Advisory Committee
recommends that the Standing Committee postpone publication of the new Rule 8011(a)(4) to
allow for coordination with the Appellate Rules Advisory Committee as it continues to study the
issue.

                                             *****




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                       Page 60 of 209
August 2026
                         PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE FEDERAL
                           RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE 1


                  1    Rule 2003. Meeting of Creditors or Equity
                  2               Security Holders
                  3    (a)      Date and Place of the Meeting.

                  4             (1)      Date. Except as provided in § 341(e), the

                  5                      United States trustee must call a meeting of

                  6                      creditors to be held:

                  7                      (A)      in a Chapter 7 or 11 case, no fewer

                  8                               than 21 days and no more than 40

                  9                               days after the order for relief; or

                10                       (B)      in a Chapter 12 or 13 case, no fewer

                11                                than 21 days and no more than 35 60

                12                                days after the order for relief; or

                13                       (C)      in a Chapter 13 case, no fewer than

                14                                21 days and no more than 50 days

                15                                after the order for relief.


                                1
                                  New material is underlined in red; matter to be omitted is
                       lined through.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                                  Page 61 of 209
August 2026
                       2       FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE




                16             (2)    Effect of a Motion or an Appeal.            The

                17                    United States trustee may set a later date for

                18                    the meeting if there is a motion to vacate the

                19                    order for relief, an appeal from such an

                20                    order, or a motion to dismiss the case.

                21            (3)     Place; Manner of Conducting Possible

                22                    Change in the Meeting Date. The meeting

                23                    may be held at a regular place for holding

                24                    court place and in the manner designated by

                25                    the United States trustee. Or the United

                26                    States trustee may designate any other place

                27                    in the district The meeting may be conducted

                28                    in person or remotely. An in-person meeting

                29                    may be held at a regular place for holding

                30                    court, or at any place in the district

                31                    designated by the United States trustee that

                32                    is convenient for the parties in interest. If the

                33                    designated meeting place is not regularly




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                             Page 62 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE                      3




                34                    staffed by the United States trustee or an

                35                    assistant who may preside, the meeting may

                36                    be held no more than 60 days after the order

                37                    for relief.

                38                                  *****

                39                          Committee Note

                40             Subdivision (a) is amended to better reflect current
                41     practices in the conduct of meetings of creditors.

                42             In paragraph (1) the time for convening the meeting
                43     of creditors in a chapter 12 or 13 case is extended to a
                44     maximum of 60 days after the order for relief. Prior to the
                45     amendment, meetings were frequently called for a date that
                46     was as many as 60 days after the order for relief under a
                47     provision in paragraph (3) that allowed such lengthening of
                48     the timeframe when “the designated meeting place [was]
                49     not regularly staffed by the United States trustee or an
                50     assistant who [could] preside.” Now that provision has been
                51     deleted, and the rule allows the U.S. trustee to call for a
                52     meeting of creditors in any chapter 12 or 13 case to be held
                53     no fewer than 21 days and no more than 60 days after the
                54     order for relief.

                55             Paragraph (3) is amended to clarify that, consistent
                56     with § 341(a) of the Bankruptcy Code, meetings of creditors
                57     may be held remotely, as well as in person, as designated
                58     by the U.S. trustee.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                         Page 63 of 209
August 2026
                            PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE
                       FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE1


                  1    Rule 5005. Filing Papers and Sending Copies to
                  2               the United States Trustee
                  3    (a)     Filing Papers.

                  4                                   *****

                  5            (3)     Electronic Filing and Signing.

                  6                    (A)      By a Represented Entity—Generally

                  7                             Required; Exceptions. An entity

                  8                             represented by an attorney must file

                  9                             electronically, unless nonelectronic

                10                              filing is allowed by the court for cause

                11                              or is allowed or required by local rule.

                12                     (B)      By an Unrepresented Individual—

                13                              When Allowed or Required.

                14                              (i)     In General. An unrepresented

                15                                      individual not represented by


                               1
                                  New material is underlined in red; matter to be omitted
                       is lined through.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                               Page 64 of 209
August 2026
                       2     FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE




                16                                   an attorney: (i) may file

                17                                   electronically only if allowed

                18                                   by use the court’s electronic-

                19                                   filing system to file papers

                20                                   and receive notice of activity

                21                                   in the case, unless a court

                22                                   order or local rule; and

                23                                   prohibits the individual from

                24                                   doing so. An unrepresented

                25                                   individual      (ii)   may    be

                26                                   required to file electronically

                27                                   only by court order in a case,

                28                                   or by a local rule that includes

                29                                   reasonable exceptions.

                30                            (ii)   Conditions and Restrictions

                31                                   on Access. A court may set

                32                                   and        enforce     reasonable

                33                                   conditions and restrictions on




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                            Page 65 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE                               3




                34                                   unrepresented            individuals’

                35                                   access       to         the      court’s

                36                                   electronic-filing                system

                37                                   (including by denying or

                38                                   revoking          access        for   a

                39                                   particular              unrepresented

                40                                   individual). But the court may

                41                                   not prohibit all unrepresented

                42                                   individuals from using the

                43                                   system unless that prohibition

                44                                   includes                      reasonable

                45                                   exceptions         or     the      court

                46                                   permits the use of another

                47                                   electronic method for filing

                48                                   papers        and              receiving

                49                                   electronic notice of activity in

                50                                   the case.

                51                    (C)     Signing. A filing made through a




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                                   Page 66 of 209
August 2026
                       4     FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE




                52                            person’s an individual’s electronic-

                53                            filing account and authorized by that

                54                            person individual, together with the

                55                            person’s individual’s name on a

                56                            signature   block,    constitutes   the

                57                            person’s individual’s signature.

                58                    (D)     Same as a Written Paper. A paper

                59                            filed electronically is a written paper

                60                            for purposes of these rules, the

                61                            Federal Rules of Civil Procedure

                62                            made applicable by these rules, and

                63                            § 107.

                64     (b)    Sending Copies to the United States Trustee.

                65            (1)     Papers Sent Electronically. All papers

                66                    required to be sent to the United States trustee

                67                    may be sent by using the court’s electronic-

                68                    filing system in accordance with Rule 9036,

                69                    unless a court order or local rule provides




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                            Page 67 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE                         5




                70                    otherwise.

                71            (2)     Papers Not Sent Electronically. If an entity

                72                    other than the clerk sends a paper to the

                73                    United States trustee without using the

                74                    court’s electronic-filing system, the entity

                75                    must promptly file a statement identifying the

                76                    paper and stating the manner by which and

                77                    the date it was sent. The clerk need not send

                78                    a copy of a paper to a United States trustee

                79                    who requests in writing that it not be sent.

                80     (c)    When a Paper Is Erroneously Filed or Delivered.

                81            (1)     Paper Intended for the Clerk. If a paper

                82                    intended to be filed with the clerk is

                83                    erroneously delivered to a person an entity

                84                    listed below, that person entity must note on

                85                    it the date of receipt and promptly send it to

                86                    the clerk:

                87                       the United States trustee;




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                            Page 68 of 209
August 2026
                       6     FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE




                88                       the trustee;

                89                       the trustee’s attorney;

                90                       a bankruptcy judge;

                91                       a district judge;

                92                       the clerk of the bankruptcy appellate

                93                        panel; or

                94                       the clerk of the district court.

                95            (2)     Paper Intended for the United States

                96                    Trustee. If a paper intended for the United

                97                    States trustee is erroneously delivered to the

                98                    clerk or to another person entity listed in (1),

                99                    the clerk or that person entity must note on it

               100                    the date of receipt and promptly send it to the

               101                    United States trustee.

               102            (3)     Applicable Filing Date. In the interests of

               103                    justice, the court may order that the original

               104                    receipt date shown on a paper erroneously

               105                    delivered under (1) or (2) be deemed the date




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                            Page 69 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE                         7




               106                    it was filed with the clerk or sent to the United

               107                    States trustee.

               108                           Committee Note

               109             Rule 5005(a)(3)(B) is amended to address electronic
               110     filing by unrepresented individuals. (Concurrent
               111     amendments are made to Rules 8011 and 9036 and to Civil
               112     Rule 5, Criminal Rule 49, and Appellate Rule 25.) The
               113     amendments expand the availability of electronic modes by
               114     which unrepresented individuals can file documents with the
               115     court and receive notice of filings that others make in the
               116     case. The amendments also conform to the terminology used
               117     elsewhere in the Bankruptcy Rules by replacing “person”
               118     with “entity” (when the intent is to encompass the broadest
               119     possible range of actors) or with “individual” (when the
               120     intent is to refer to a human being).

               121             Under amended Rule 5005(a)(3)(B)(i), the
               122     presumption is the opposite of the presumption set by the
               123     prior rule. That is, under the amended rule, unrepresented
               124     individuals are presumptively authorized to use the court’s
               125     electronic-filing system to file documents in their case. If a
               126     court wishes to restrict unrepresented individuals’ access to
               127     the court’s electronic-filing system, it must adopt an order or
               128     local rule to impose that restriction.

               129            Amended Rule 5005(a)(3)(B)(ii) states that the court
               130     may set reasonable conditions and restrictions on access by
               131     unrepresented individuals to the court’s electronic-filing
               132     system. For example, access to electronic filing could be
               133     allowed only to unrepresented individuals who are not
               134     incarcerated (in light of the distinctive logistical
               135     considerations that apply in carceral settings), satisfactorily
               136     complete required training and certifications, and comply




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                             Page 70 of 209
August 2026
                       8     FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE




               137     with other reasonable conditions on access.

               138             Amended Rule 5005(a)(3)(B)(ii) expressly states
               139     that a reasonable restriction would include, where
               140     appropriate, orders barring a specific unrepresented
               141     individual from accessing the court’s electronic-filing
               142     system or revoking a specific unrepresented individual’s
               143     access to the court’s electronic-filing system. Another
               144     example would be a local provision stating that certain types
               145     of filings cannot be filed by means of the court’s electronic-
               146     filing system.

               147             However, amended Rule 5005(a)(3)(B)(ii) also
               148     expressly prohibits a court from barring all unrepresented
               149     individuals from using the court’s electronic-filing system,
               150     unless the court also either (1) includes reasonable
               151     exceptions to the prohibition, or (2) permits unrepresented
               152     individuals to use another electronic method for filing
               153     documents (such as by email or by upload through an
               154     electronic document submission system) and an alternative
               155     electronic means for receiving notice of court filings and
               156     orders (such as an electronic noticing program). For
               157     example, local provisions that require unrepresented
               158     individuals who seek to use the court’s electronic-filing
               159     system to obtain the court’s permission would count as
               160     including reasonable exceptions, so long as such permission
               161     is granted or withheld in accordance with the reasonable
               162     conditions and restrictions on access set by the court.

               163             Rule 5005(a)(3)(C) is amended to reflect that courts’
               164     electronic-filing accounts are held by individuals and not by
               165     persons, as defined by § 101(41) of the Code. References to
               166     a “person” in Rules 5005(c)(1) and (2) are replaced by
               167     references to an “entity”; under § 101(15) of the Code
               168     “entity” is a broader term than “person” and the amendment
               169     ensures that the chosen term encompasses all of the listed




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                           Page 71 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE    9




               170     types of recipients.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules       Page 72 of 209
August 2026
                            PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE
                       FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE1


                  1    Rule 8011. Filing and Service; Signature

                  2    (a)     Filing.

                  3            (1)       With the Clerk. A document required or

                  4                      permitted to be filed in a district court or BAP

                  5                      must be filed with the clerk of that court.

                  6            (2)       Method and Timeliness.

                  7                      (A)     Nonelectronic Filing.

                  8                                 *****

                  9                      (B)     Electronic      Filing.(i)    By       a

                10                               Represented       Person       Entity—

                11                               Generally Required; Exceptions. An

                12                               entity represented by an attorney must

                13                               file      electronically,        unless

                14                               nonelectronic filing is allowed by the



                               1
                                  New material is underlined in red; matter to be omitted
                       is lined through.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                               Page 73 of 209
August 2026
                       2     FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE




                15                            court for cause or is allowed or

                16                            required by local rule.

                17                            (ii)(C) Electronic     Filing     By    an

                18                                   Unrepresented          Individual—

                19                                   When Allowed or Required.

                20                                   (i)        In    General.        An

                21                                              unrepresented

                22                                              individual            not

                23                                              represented     by     an

                24                                              attorney:

                25                                              •         may         file

                26                                              electronically only if

                27                                              allowed by use the

                28                                              court’s       electronic-

                29                                              filing system to file

                30                                              documents             and

                31                                              receive      notice    of

                32                                              activity in the case,




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                                Page 74 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE                            3




                33                                              unless a court order or

                34                                              by local rule prohibits

                35                                              the individual from

                36                                              doing so.; and An

                37                                              unrepresented

                38                                              individual

                39                                              • may be required to

                40                                              file electronically only

                41                                              by court order in a

                42                                              case, or by a local rule

                43                                              that            includes

                44                                              reasonable exceptions.

                45                                   (ii)       Conditions            and

                46                                              Restrictions          on

                47                                              Access. A court may

                48                                              set    and      enforce

                49                                              reasonable conditions

                50                                              and    restrictions   on




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                               Page 75 of 209
August 2026
                       4     FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE




                51                                              unrepresented

                52                                              individuals’ access to

                53                                              the court’s electronic-

                54                                              filing           system

                55                                              (including by denying

                56                                              or revoking access for

                57                                              a             particular

                58                                              unrepresented

                59                                              individual). But the

                60                                              court may not prohibit

                61                                              all      unrepresented

                62                                              individuals from using

                63                                              the system unless that

                64                                              prohibition     includes

                65                                              reasonable exceptions

                66                                              or the court permits

                67                                              the use of another

                68                                              electronic method for




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                              Page 76 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE                         5




                69                                              filing documents and

                70                                              receiving   electronic

                71                                              notice of activity in

                72                                              the case.

                73                  (iii)(D) Electronically Filed Same as a

                74                            Written Paper. A document filed

                75                            electronically is a written paper for

                76                            purposes of these rules.

                77                   (C)(E) When Paper Copies Are Required.

                78                            No paper copies are required when a

                79                            document is filed electronically. If a

                80                            document is filed by mail or by

                81                            delivery to the district court or BAP,

                82                            no additional copies are required. But

                83                            the district court or BAP may, by

                84                            local rule or order in a particular case,

                85                            require that a specific number of

                86                            paper copies be filed or furnished.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                             Page 77 of 209
August 2026
                       6     FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE




                87            (3)     Clerk’s Refusal of Documents. The court

                88                    clerk must not refuse to accept for filing any

                89                    document solely because it is not presented in

                90                    proper form as required by these rules or by

                91                    any local rule or practice.

                92     (b)    Service of All Documents Required. Unless a rule

                93            requires service by the clerk or the document will be

                94            served through the court’s electronic-filing system

                95            under (c)(1), a party must, at or before the time of the

                96            filing of a document, serve it on the other parties to

                97            the appeal. Service on a party represented by counsel

                98            must be made on the party’s counsel.

                99     (c)    Manner of Service.

               100            (1)     Service by a Notice of Case Activity Sent

               101                    Through the Court’s Electronic-Filing

               102                    System. A notice of case activity sent to an

               103                    entity registered to receive it through the

               104                    court’s electronic-filing system constitutes




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                            Page 78 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE                            7




               105                    service      on      that   entity,   with    these

               106                    qualifications:

               107                    (A)       such service is not effective if the filer

               108                              learns that it did not reach the entity

               109                              to be served; and

               110                    (B)       a court may provide by order or local

               111                              rule that if a document is filed under

               112                              seal, it must be served by other

               113                              means.

               114            (1)(2) Nonelectronic Service by Other Means.

               115                    Nonelectronic service A document may also

               116                    be served under this rule by any of the

               117                    following:

               118                    (A)       personal delivery;

               119                    (B)       mail; or

               120                    (C)       third-party commercial carrier for

               121                              delivery within 3 days.; or

               122            (2)     Service By Electronic Means. Electronic




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                                Page 79 of 209
August 2026
                       8     FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE




               123                    service may be made by:

               124                    (A)     sending a document to a registered

               125                            user by filing it with the court’s

               126                            electronic-filing system; or

               127                     (B)     using other (D) electronic means that

               128                             the   person     entity    served   has

               129                             consented to in writing, but such

               130                             electronic service is not effective if

               131                             the sender learns that it did not reach

               132                             the entity to be served.

               133            (3)     When Service Is Complete.

               134                    (A)     For Service by a Notice of Case

               135                            Activity. For any service deadlines,

               136                            service by a notice of case activity is

               137                            complete as of the date of filing. For

               138                            any deadlines that run from the date

               139                            of service, service by a notice of case

               140                            activity is complete as of the notice’s




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                            Page 80 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE                      9




               141                            date.

               142                    (B)     For Service by Other Electronic

               143                            Means. Service by other electronic

               144                            means is complete on sending.

               145                    (C)     For Service by Mail or Commercial

               146                            Carrier. Service by mail or by third-

               147                            party commercial carrier is complete

               148                            on mailing or delivery to the carrier.

               149                            Service by electronic means is

               150                            complete on filing or sending, unless

               151                            the person making service receives

               152                            notice that the document was not

               153                            received by the person served.

               154            (4)     Definition of “Notice of Case Activity.” The

               155                    term “notice of case activity” includes a

               156                    notice of docket activity, a notice of

               157                    electronic filing, and any other similar

               158                    electronic      notice    provided   to   case




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                          Page 81 of 209
August 2026
                       10      FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE




               159                    participants through the court’s electronic-

               160                    filing system to inform them of activity on the

               161                    docket.

               162     (d)    Proof of Service.

               163            (1)     Requirements. A document presented for

               164                    filing must contain either of the following if

               165                    it was served other than through the court’s

               166                    electronic-filing system:

               167                    (A)       an acknowledgement of service by

               168                              the person entity served; or

               169                    (B)       proof of service consisting of a

               170                              statement by the person individual

               171                              who made service certifying:

               172                              (i)     the date and manner of

               173                                      service;

               174                              (ii)    the names of the persons

               175                                      entities served; and

               176                              (iii)   the mail or electronic address,




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                             Page 82 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE                       11




               177                                   the fax number, or the address

               178                                   of the place of delivery—as

               179                                   appropriate for the manner of

               180                                   service—for       each     person

               181                                   entity served.

               182                    (2)     Delayed Proof of Service. A district

               183                            or BAP clerk may accept a document

               184                            for      filing         without      an

               185                            acknowledgement or proof of service,

               186                            but must require the acknowledgment

               187                            or proof of service to be filed

               188                            promptly thereafter.

               189                    (3)     For a Brief or Appendix. When a

               190                            brief or appendix is filed, the proof of

               191                            service must also state the date and

               192                            manner by which it was filed.

               193     (e)    Signature Always Required.

               194            (1)     Electronic Filing. Every document filed




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                            Page 83 of 209
August 2026
                       12      FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE




               195                    electronically must include the electronic

               196                    signature of the person individual filing it or,

               197                    if the person an entity is represented, the

               198                    counsel’s electronic signature. A filing made

               199                    through a person’s an individual’s electronic-

               200                    filing account and authorized by that

               201                    person—individual—together         with    that

               202                    person’s individual’s name on a signature

               203                    block—constitutes the person’s individual’s

               204                    signature.

               205            (2)     Paper Filing. Every document filed in paper

               206                    form must be signed by the person individual

               207                    filing it or, if the person an entity is

               208                    represented, by the person’s entity’s counsel.

               209                          Committee Note

               210            Rule 8011 is amended to address two topics
               211     concerning    self-represented   litigants.   (Concurrent
               212     amendments are made to Rules 5005 and 9036 and to Civil
               213     Rule 5, Criminal Rule 49, and Appellate Rule 25.) Rule
               214     8011(a) is amended to expand the availability of electronic
               215     modes by which unrepresented individuals can file




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                            Page 84 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE                          13




               216     documents with the court and receive notice of filings that
               217     others make in the case. Rule 8011(c) is amended to address
               218     service of documents filed by an unrepresented individual in
               219     paper form. Because all such paper filings are uploaded by
               220     court staff into the court’s electronic-filing system, there is
               221     no need to require separate paper service by the filer on case
               222     participants who receive an electronic notice of the filing
               223     from the court’s electronic-filing system. Rule 8011(c)’s
               224     treatment of service is also reorganized to reflect the primacy
               225     of service by means of the electronic notice. The
               226     amendments also conform to the terminology used
               227     elsewhere in the Bankruptcy Rules by replacing “person”
               228     with “entity” (when the intent is to encompass the broadest
               229     possible range of actors) or with “individual” (when the
               230     intent is to refer to a human being).

               231             Subdivision (a)(2)(C). Under new Rule
               232     8011(a)(2)(C)(i), the presumption is the opposite of the
               233     presumption set by the prior Rule 8011(a)(2)(B)(ii). That is,
               234     under new Rule 8011(a)(2)(C)(i), unrepresented individuals
               235     are presumptively authorized to use the court’s electronic-
               236     filing system to file documents in their case. If a district court
               237     or BAP wishes to restrict unrepresented individuals’ access
               238     to the court’s electronic-filing system, it must adopt an order
               239     or local rule to impose that restriction.

               240            New Rule 8011(a)(2)(C)(ii) states that the court may
               241     set reasonable conditions and restrictions on access by
               242     unrepresented individuals to the court’s electronic-filing
               243     system. For example, access to electronic filing could be
               244     allowed only to unrepresented individuals who are not
               245     incarcerated (in light of the distinctive logistical
               246     considerations that apply in carceral settings), satisfactorily
               247     complete required training and certifications, and comply
               248     with other reasonable conditions on access.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                               Page 85 of 209
August 2026
                       14      FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE




               249             New Rule 8011(a)(2)(C)(ii) expressly states that a
               250     reasonable restriction would include, where appropriate,
               251     orders barring a specific unrepresented individual from
               252     accessing the court’s electronic-filing system or revoking a
               253     specific unrepresented individual’s access to the court’s
               254     electronic-filing system. Another example would be a local
               255     provision stating that certain types of filings cannot be filed
               256     by means of the court’s electronic-filing system.

               257             However, new Rule 8011(a)(2)(C)(ii) also expressly
               258     prohibits a court from barring all unrepresented individuals
               259     from using the court’s electronic-filing system, unless the
               260     court also either (1) includes reasonable exceptions to the
               261     prohibition, or (2) permits unrepresented individuals to use
               262     another electronic method for filing documents (such as by
               263     email or by upload through an electronic document
               264     submission system) and an alternative electronic means for
               265     receiving notice of court filings and orders (such as an
               266     electronic noticing program). For example, local provisions
               267     that require unrepresented individuals who seek to use the
               268     court’s electronic-filing system to obtain the court’s
               269     permission would count as including reasonable exceptions,
               270     so long as such permission is granted or withheld in
               271     accordance with the reasonable conditions and restrictions
               272     on access set by the court.

               273             Subdivision (b). Prior Rule 8011(b) generally
               274     required that a party, “at or before the time of filing a
               275     document, [must] serve it on the other parties to the appeal.”
               276     The rule exempted from this requirement instances when “a
               277     rule requires service by the clerk.” The rule is amended to
               278     add a second exemption, for instances when “the document
               279     will be served through the court’s electronic-filing system
               280     under (c)(1).” This amendment reflects that new Rule
               281     8011(c)(1) encompasses service by the notice of case
               282     activity that results from the clerk’s uploading into the




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                            Page 86 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE                          15




               283     system a paper filing by an unrepresented individual. (As to
               284     when such service is complete, see subdivision (c)(3)(A).)

               285             Subdivision (c). Rule 8011(c) is restructured so that
               286     the primary means of service—that is, service by means of
               287     the court’s electronic-filing system—is addressed first, in
               288     subdivision (c)(1). Prior Rule 8011(c)(1) is now Rule
               289     8011(c)(2), which continues to address alternative means of
               290     service. New Rule 8011(c)(4) defines the term “notice of
               291     case activity” as any electronic notice provided to case
               292     participants through the court’s electronic-filing system to
               293     inform them of a filing or other activity on the docket.

               294               Subdivision (c)(1). Amended Rule 8011(c)(1)
               295     eliminates the requirement of separate (paper) service on a
               296     litigant who is registered to receive a notice of case activity
               297     from the court’s electronic-filing system. Litigants who are
               298     registered to receive a notice of case activity include those
               299     litigants who are participating in the court’s electronic-filing
               300     system with respect to the case in question and also include
               301     those litigants who receive the notice because they have
               302     registered for a court-based electronic-noticing program.
               303     (Prior Rule 8011(c)(2)(A)’s provision for service by
               304     “sending a document to a registered user by filing it with the
               305     court’s electronic-filing system” had already eliminated the
               306     requirement of paper service on registered users of the
               307     court’s electronic-filing system by other registered users of
               308     the system; the amendment extends this exemption from
               309     paper service to those who file by a means other than through
               310     the court’s electronic-filing system.)

               311              New Rule 8011(c)(1)(A) provides that service by
               312     means of the court’s electronic-filing system is not effective
               313     if the filer learns that it did not reach the person to be served.
               314     This provision carries forward the principle previously
               315     contained in prior Rule 8011(c)(3). Prior Rule 8011(c)(3)




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                               Page 87 of 209
August 2026
                       16      FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE




               316     stated that “Service by electronic means is complete on filing
               317     or sending, unless the person making service receives notice
               318     that the document was not received by the person served.”
               319     By contrast, the parallel provisions in current Civil Rule 5
               320     and Criminal Rule 49 use “learns” instead of “receives
               321     notice.” In drafting the 2018 amendments to Rules 8011 and
               322     9036, the Bankruptcy Rules Committee had chosen
               323     “receives notice” in order to prevent litigants from purposely
               324     ignoring notice to avoid learning that the document was not
               325     received. However, the term “learns” is the broader term and
               326     it encompasses “receiving notice.” Thus, the amended Rules
               327     8011 and 9036 use “learns” in conformity with the other sets
               328     of rules.

               329             New Rule 8011(c)(1)(B) states that a court may
               330     provide by order or local rule that if a paper is filed under
               331     seal, it must be served by other means. This sentence is
               332     designed to account for districts or BAPs in which parties in
               333     the case cannot access other participants’ sealed filings via
               334     the court’s electronic-filing system.

               335             Subdivision (c)(2). Subdivision (c)(2) carries
               336     forward the contents of prior Rules 8011(c)(1) and (2), with
               337     three changes.

               338             The       subdivision’s       introductory     phrase
               339     (“Nonelectronic service may be by any of the following”) is
               340     amended to read “A document may also be served under this
               341     rule by.” This locution ensures that what will become Rule
               342     8011(c)(2) remains an option for serving any litigant, even
               343     one who receives notices of filing. This option might be
               344     useful to a litigant who will be filing non-electronically but
               345     who wishes to effect service on their opponent before the
               346     time when the court will have uploaded the filing into the
               347     court’s system (thus generating the notice of case activity).




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                           Page 88 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE                       17




               348             Prior Rule 8011(c)(2)(A)’s reference to “sending a
               349     document to a registered user by filing it with the court’s
               350     electronic-filing system” is deleted, because this is now
               351     covered by new Rule 8011(c)(1).

               352             The concept that service by other electronic means is
               353     not effective if the sender learns that the document was not
               354     received by the person served—previously contained in
               355     prior Rule 8011(c)(3)—is relocated to what now is Rule
               356     8011(c)(2)(D). As noted above with respect to subdivision
               357     (c)(1), the amended rule in subdivision (c)(2)(D) uses
               358     “learns” instead of the prior rule’s “receives notice.”

               359            Subdivision (c)(3). Rule 8011(c)(3) (“When Service
               360     is Complete”) is amended to distinguish between service
               361     under new Rule 8011(c)(1)—that is, service by means of the
               362     notice of case activity—and service by “other electronic
               363     means.”

               364              When a litigant files a paper other than through the
               365     court’s electronic-filing system, service on a litigant who is
               366     registered to receive a notice of case activity through the
               367     court’s electronic-filing system occurs by means of the
               368     notice of case activity. But when the filing is made other than
               369     through the court’s electronic-filing system, there can be a
               370     short time lag between the date the litigant files the
               371     document with the court and the date that the clerk’s office
               372     uploads it into the court’s electronic-filing system. Thus,
               373     new subdivision (c)(3)(A) provides that, for purposes of any
               374     deadlines for making service, service by a notice of case
               375     activity is complete as of the date of filing. But the amended
               376     rule provides that, for purposes of any deadlines that run
               377     from the date of service, service is complete as of the date of
               378     the notice of case activity. Thus, the amended rule ensures
               379     that if there is a delay between the date the court receives a
               380     filing not made through the electronic-filing system and the




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                            Page 89 of 209
August 2026
                       18      FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE




               381     date the court uploads that filing into the electronic-filing
               382     system, that delay will not diminish the time allowed to the
               383     party whose deadline runs from the date of service.

               384             Under subdivision (c)(3)(B), service by other
               385     electronic means continues to be complete on sending.

               386            In addition to providing when service was complete,
               387     old Rule 8011(c)(3) addressed what happened if the person
               388     making electronic service received notice that the document
               389     was not received by the person to be served. The latter is now
               390     addressed by new Rules 8011(c)(1)(A) and (c)(2)(D), which
               391     provide that electronic service is not effective if the filer or
               392     sender learns that it did not reach the person to be served.

               393             Subdivision (c)(4). New Rule 8011(c)(4) defines the
               394     term “notice of case activity” as any electronic notice
               395     provided to case participants through the court’s electronic-
               396     filing system to inform them of a filing or other activity on
               397     the docket. There are two equivalent terms currently in use:
               398     Notice of Electronic Filing and Notice of Docket Activity.
               399     “Notice of case activity” is intended to encompass both of
               400     those terms, as well as any equivalent terms that may come
               401     into use in future. The word “electronic” is deleted as
               402     superfluous now that electronic filing is the default method.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                             Page 90 of 209
August 2026
                            PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE
                       FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE1


                  1    Rule 9006. Computing and Extending Time;
                  2    Motions
                  3                                *****

                  4    (f)     Additional Time After Certain Service. When a

                  5            party may or must act within a specified time after

                  6            being served and service is made by mail or under

                  7            Fed. R. Civ. P. 5(b)(23)(D) (leaving with the clerk)

                  8            or (F) (other means consented to), 3 days are added

                  9            after the period would otherwise expire under (a).

                10                                 *****

                11                            Committee Note

                12           Subdivision (f) is amended to conform to the
                13     renumbering of Civil Rule 5(b)(2) as Rule 5(b)(3).




                               1
                                  New material is underlined in red; matter to be omitted
                       is lined through.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                               Page 91 of 209
August 2026
                            PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE
                       FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE1


                  1    Rule 9036. Electronic Notice and Service

                  2    (a)     In General. This rule applies whenever these rules

                  3            require or permit sending a notice or serving a

                  4            document by mail or other means.

                  5    (b)     Notices from and Service by the Court.

                  6            (1)     To Registered Users. The clerk may send

                  7                    notice to or serve a registered user by filing

                  8                    the notice or document with the court’s

                  9                    electronic-filing system.

                10             (2)     To All Recipients. For any recipient, the clerk

                11                     may send notice or serve a document by

                12                     electronic means that the recipient consented

                13                     to in writing, including by designating an

                14                     electronic address for receiving notices. But



                               1
                                  New material is underlined in red; matter to be omitted
                       is lined through.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                               Page 92 of 209
August 2026
                       2      FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE




                15                    these exceptions apply:

                16                    (A)     if the recipient has registered an

                17                            electronic     address    with     the

                18                            Administrative Office of the United

                19                            States Courts’ bankruptcy-noticing

                20                            program, the clerk must use that

                21                            address; and

                22                    (B)     if an entity has been designated by the

                23                            Director of the Administrative Office

                24                            of the United States Courts as a high-

                25                            volume paper-notice recipient, the

                26                            clerk may send the notice to or serve

                27                            the document electronically at an

                28                            address designated by the Director,

                29                            unless the entity has designated an

                30                            address under § 342(e) or (f).

                31     (c)    Notices from and Service by an Entity. An entity

                32            may send notice or serve a document in the same




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                           Page 93 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE                         3




                33            manner that the clerk does under (b), excluding

                34            (b)(2)(A) and (B).

                35            (1)     Notice of Case Activity Sent Through the

                36                    Court’s Electronic-Filing System. A notice

                37                    of case activity sent to an entity registered to

                38                    receive it through the court’s electronic-filing

                39                    system constitutes notice or service on that

                40                    entity, with these qualifications:

                41                    (A)     such notice or service is not effective

                42                            if the filer learns that it did not reach

                43                            the entity to be notified or served; and

                44                    (B)     a court may provide by order or local

                45                            rule that if a document is filed under

                46                            seal, neither service nor notice occurs

                47                            under this paragraph (c)(1).

                48            (2)     Electronic Means Consented To. An entity

                49                    may also send notice or serve a document by

                50                    electronic means that the recipient consented




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                             Page 94 of 209
August 2026
                       4      FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE




                51                    to in writing, including by designating an

                52                    electronic address for receiving notices. But

                53                    such notice or service is not effective if the

                54                    sender learns that it did not reach the entity to

                55                    be notified or served.

                56            (3)     Definition of “Notice of Case Activity.” The

                57                    term “notice of case activity” includes a

                58                    notice of docket activity, a notice of

                59                    electronic filing, and any other similar

                60                    electronic    notice      provided    to    case

                61                    participants through the court’s electronic-

                62                    filing system to inform them of activity on the

                63                    docket.

                64     (d)    When Notice or Service Is Complete; Keeping an

                65            Address Current.

                66            (1)     Notice of Case Activity Sent Through the

                67                    Court’s Electronic-Filing System. For any

                68                    notice or service deadlines, notice or service




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                             Page 95 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE                        5




                69                    by a notice of case activity is complete as of

                70                    the date of filing. For any deadlines that run

                71                    from the date of notice or service, notice or

                72                    service by a notice of case activity is

                73                    complete as of the date of the notice of case

                74                    activity.

                75            (2)     Other Electronic Means. Electronic notice

                76                    or service by other electronic means is

                77                    complete upon filing or sending but is not

                78                    effective if the filer or sender receives notice

                79                    that it did not reach the person to be notified

                80                    or served.

                81            (3)     Keeping an Address Current. The recipient

                82                    must keep its electronic address current with

                83                    the clerk.

                84     (e)    Inapplicability. This rule does not apply to any

                85            document required to be served in accordance with

                86            Rule 7004.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                            Page 96 of 209
August 2026
                       6      FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE




                87                           Committee Note

                88              Rule 9036 is amended to address service by
                89     unrepresented individuals. (Concurrent amendments are
                90     made to Rules 5005 and 8011 and to Civil Rule 5, Criminal
                91     Rule 49, and Appellate Rule 25.) Rule 9036(c) is amended
                92     to address service of documents filed by an unrepresented
                93     individual in paper form. Because all such paper filings are
                94     uploaded by court staff into the court’s electronic-filing
                95     system, there is no need to require separate paper service by
                96     the filer on case participants who receive an electronic notice
                97     of the filing from the court’s electronic-filing system.
                98     Conforming amendments are made to Rule 9036(d).

                99             Subdivision (c). Rule 9036(c) previously stated
               100     simply that “[a]n entity may send notice or serve a document
               101     in the same manner that the clerk does under (b), excluding
               102     (b)(2)(A) and (B).” That provision could be read to exclude
               103     instances when an unrepresented individual files a document
               104     in paper form and the clerk’s office scans the document and
               105     uploads it into the court’s electronic-filing system. Thus
               106     read, the previous rules required separate (paper) service in
               107     such instances, even on litigants who were registered to
               108     receive a notice of case activity from the court’s electronic-
               109     filing system. New Rule 9036(c) restates the substance of the
               110     service options previously incorporated by reference to Rule
               111     9036(b), but does so in a way that changes the rule
               112     concerning service by a litigant who makes a filing other
               113     than through the court’s electronic-filing system.

               114             New Rule 9036(c)(1) eliminates the requirement of
               115     separate (paper) service on a litigant who is registered to
               116     receive a notice of case activity from the court’s electronic-
               117     filing system. Litigants who are registered to receive a notice
               118     of case activity include those litigants who are participating
               119     in the court’s electronic-filing system with respect to the




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                            Page 97 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE                           7




               120     case in question and also include those litigants who receive
               121     the notice because they have registered for a court-based
               122     electronic-noticing program. (Prior Rule 9036(c)’s provision
               123     for notice or service “in the same manner that the clerk does
               124     under” Rule 9036(b)(1) had already eliminated the
               125     requirement of paper service on registered users of the
               126     court’s electronic-filing system by other registered users of
               127     the system; the amendment extends this exemption from
               128     paper service to those who file a document with the court by
               129     a means other than through the court’s electronic-filing
               130     system.)

               131              New Rule 9036(c)(1)(A) provides that notice or
               132     service by means of the court’s electronic-filing system is
               133     not effective if the filer learns that it did not reach the person
               134     to be notified or served. This provision carries forward the
               135     principle previously contained in prior Rule 9036(d). Prior
               136     Rule 9036(d) stated that “Electronic notice or service is
               137     complete upon filing or sending but is not effective if the
               138     filer or sender receives notice that it did not reach the person
               139     to be notified or served.” By contrast, the parallel provisions
               140     in current Civil Rule 5 and Criminal Rule 49 use “learns”
               141     instead of “receives notice.” In drafting the 2018
               142     amendments to Rules 8011 and 9036, the Bankruptcy Rules
               143     Committee had chosen “receives notice” in order to prevent
               144     litigants from purposely ignoring notice to avoid learning
               145     that the document was not received. However, the term
               146     “learns” is the broader term and it encompasses “receiving
               147     notice.” Thus, the amended Rules 8011 and 9036 use
               148     “learns” in conformity with the other sets of rules.

               149             New Rule 9036(c)(1)(B) states that a court may
               150     provide by order or local rule that if a paper is filed under
               151     seal, notice or service must occur by other means. This is
               152     designed to account for districts or BAPs in which parties in
               153     the case cannot access other participants’ sealed filings via




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                               Page 98 of 209
August 2026
                       8      FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE




               154     the court’s electronic-filing system.

               155             What is now Rule 9036(c)(2) carries forward the
               156     prior option to effect notice or service by consented-to
               157     electronic means. It also provides that such notice or service
               158     is not effective if the sender learns that it did not reach the
               159     entity to be notified or served. This provision carries forward
               160     the principle previously contained in prior Rule 9036(d). As
               161     noted above with respect to subdivision (c)(1), the amended
               162     rule in subdivision (c)(2) uses “learns” instead of the prior
               163     rule’s “receives notice.”

               164             New Rule 9036(c)(3) defines the term “notice of case
               165     activity” as any electronic notice provided to case
               166     participants through the court’s electronic-filing system to
               167     inform them of a filing or other activity on the docket. There
               168     are two equivalent terms currently in use: Notice of
               169     Electronic Filing and Notice of Docket Activity. “Notice of
               170     case activity” is intended to encompass both of those terms,
               171     as well as any equivalent terms that may come into use in
               172     future. The word “electronic” is deleted as superfluous now
               173     that electronic filing is the default method.

               174              Subdivision (d). New subdivision (d)(2) carries
               175     forward the rule’s prior treatment of the timing of notice or
               176     service by electronic means other than the court’s electronic-
               177     filing system. New subdivision (d)(1) addresses the timing
               178     of notice or service through the court’s electronic-filing
               179     system.

               180            Previously, Rule 9036(d) provided simply that
               181     “Electronic notice or service is complete upon filing or
               182     sending but is not effective if the filer or sender receives
               183     notice that it did not reach the person to be notified or
               184     served.” The adoption of new Rule 9036(c)(1) requires a
               185     change to Rule 9036(d): Under new subdivision (c)(1), when




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                            Page 99 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE                           9




               186     a litigant files a paper other than through the court’s
               187     electronic-filing system, service on a litigant who is
               188     registered to receive a notice of case activity through the
               189     court’s electronic-filing system occurs by means of the
               190     notice of case activity. But when the filing is made other than
               191     through the court’s electronic-filing system, there can be a
               192     short time lag between the date the litigant files the
               193     document with the court and the date that the clerk’s office
               194     uploads it into the court’s electronic-filing system. Thus,
               195     new subdivision (d)(1) provides that, for purposes of any
               196     deadlines for notifying or making service, notice or service
               197     by a notice of case activity is complete as of the date of
               198     filing. But the amended rule provides that, for purposes of
               199     any deadlines that run from the date of notice or service,
               200     notice or service is complete as of the date of the notice of
               201     case activity. Thus, the amended rule ensures that if there is
               202     a delay between the date the court receives a filing not made
               203     through the electronic-filing system and the date the court
               204     uploads that filing into the electronic-filing system, that
               205     delay will not diminish the time allowed to the party whose
               206     deadline runs from the date of notice or service.

               207            New subdivision (d)(2) carries forward—for notice
               208     or service by other electronic means—the prior rule’s
               209     treatment; that is, such notice or service is complete upon
               210     sending.

               211             Prior Rule 9036(d)’s provision that electronic notice
               212     or service is not effective if the filer or sender receives notice
               213     that it did not reach the person to be notified or served is
               214     revised and relocated to new Rules 9036(c)(1)(A) and
               215     9036(c)(2).




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                               Page 100 of 209
August 2026
                         PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE FEDERAL
                           RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE1


                  1    Rule 9037. Protecting Privacy for Filings

                  2    (a)      Redacted Filings. Unless the court orders otherwise,

                  3             in an electronic or paper filing with the court,

                  4             including any exhibit or attachment, that contains an

                  5             individual’s      social-security      number,      taxpayer-

                  6             identification number, or birth date, the name of an

                  7             individual, other than the debtor, known to be and

                  8             identified as a minor, or a financial-account number,

                  9             a party or nonparty making the filing may include

                10              only:

                11              (1)      the last four digits of the social-security

                12                       number and taxpayer-identification number;

                13              (2)      the year of the individual’s birth;




                                1
                                  New material is underlined in red; matter to be omitted is
                       lined through.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                                   Page 101 of 209
August 2026
                       2       FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE




                14            (3)     the minor’s initials a pseudonym in place of

                15                    the name of the individual known to be and

                16                    identified as a minor; and

                17            (4)     the   last   four   digits   of   the financial-

                18                    account number.

                19     (b)    Exemptions from the Redaction Requirement.

                20            The redaction requirement does not apply to the

                21            following:

                22            (1)     a financial-account number that identifies the

                23                    property allegedly subject to forfeiture in a

                24                    forfeiture proceeding;

                25            (2)     the record of an administrative or agency

                26                    proceeding, unless filed with a proof of

                27                    claim;

                28            (3)     the official record of a state-court proceeding;

                29            (4)     the record of a court or tribunal, if that record

                30                    was not subject to the redaction requirement

                31                    when originally filed;




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                             Page 102 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE                        3




                32            (5)       a filing covered by (c); and

                33            (6)       a filing subject to § 110.

                34     (c)    Filings Made Under Seal. The court may order that

                35            a filing be made under seal without redaction. The

                36            court may later unseal the filing or order the entity

                37            that made it to file a redacted version for the public

                38            record.

                39     (d)    Protective Orders. For cause, the court may by

                40            order in a case:

                41            (1)       require redaction of additional information;

                42                      or

                43            (2)       limit or prohibit a nonparty’s remote

                44                      electronic access to a document filed with the

                45                      court.

                46     (e)    Option for Additional Unredacted Document

                47            Under Seal. An entity filing a redacted document

                48            may also file an unredacted copy under seal. The




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                            Page 103 of 209
August 2026
                       4       FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE




                49            court must retain the unredacted copy as part of the

                50            record.

                51     (f)    Option for Filing a Reference List. A filing that

                52            contains redacted information may be filed together

                53            with a reference list that identifies each item of

                54            redacted information and specifies an appropriate

                55            identifier that uniquely corresponds to each item

                56            listed. The list must be filed under seal and may be

                57            amended as of right. A reference in the case to a listed

                58            identifier will be construed to refer to the

                59            corresponding item of information.

                60     (g)    Waiver of Protection of Identifiers. An entity

                61            waives the protection of (a) for the entity’s own

                62            information by filing it without redaction and not

                63            under seal.

                64     (h)    Motion to Redact a Previously Filed Document.

                65            (1)       Content; Service. Unless the court orders

                66                      otherwise, an entity seeking to redact from a




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                            Page 104 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE                        5




                67                    previously filed document information that is

                68                    protected under (a) must:

                69                    (A)     file a motion that identifies the

                70                            proposed redactions;

                71                    (B)     attach to it the proposed redacted

                72                            document;

                73                    (C)     include the docket number—or proof-

                74                            of-claim number—of the previously

                75                            filed document; and

                76                    (D)     serve the motion and attachment on:

                77                            •   the debtor;

                78                            •   the debtor’s attorney;

                79                            •   any trustee;

                80                            •   the United States trustee;

                81                            •   the entity that filed the unredacted

                82                                document; and

                83                            •   any individual whose personal

                84                                identifying information is to be




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                            Page 105 of 209
August 2026
                       6       FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE




                85                                 redacted.

                86            (2)     Restricting Public Access to the Unredacted

                87                    Document;       Docketing     the    Redacted

                88                    Document. Pending its ruling, the court must

                89                    promptly restrict access to the motion and the

                90                    unredacted document. If the court grants the

                91                    motion, the clerk must docket the redacted

                92                    document. The restrictions on public access

                93                    to the motion and unredacted document

                94                    remain in effect until a further court order. If

                95                    the court denies the motion, the restrictions

                96                    must be lifted, unless the court orders

                97                    otherwise.

                98                          Committee Note

                99             The changes to Rule 9037(a)(3) are made
               100     to conform the treatment of references to minors in filings in
               101     bankruptcy court to the changes to Fed. R. Crim. P. 49.1 and
               102     Fed. R. Civ. P. 52. Use of pseudonyms is more protective of
               103     the privacy and safety of the minors. The other conforming
               104     change in Rule 9037(a) makes clear that the redactions
               105     covered by the rule include exhibits and attachments. But
               106     the exemptions in subsection (b) still apply to exhibits and




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                            Page 106 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE                    7




               107     attachments (though a protective order under subsection (d)
               108     may require additional omission or redaction).




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                        Page 107 of 209
August 2026
                    FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules   Page 108 of 209
August 2026
              Excerpt from the May 6, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Civil Rules



                        COMMITTEE ON RULES OF PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
                                                   OF THE
                            JUDICIAL CONFERENCE OF THE UNITED STATES
                                        WASHINGTON, D.C. 20544


JAMES C. DEVER III                                                              CHAIRS OF ADVISORY COMMITTEES
     CHAIR
                                                                                          ALLISON H. EID
CAROLYN A. DUBAY                                                                         APPELLATE RULES
   SECRETARY
                                                                                      REBECCA B. CONNELLY
                                                                                       BANKRUPTCY RULES

                                                                                         SARAH S. VANCE
                                                                                           CIVIL RULES

                                                                                       MICHAEL W. MOSMAN
                                                                                         CRIMINAL RULES

                                                                                         JESSE M. FURMAN
                                                                                          EVIDENCE RULES



                                           MEMORANDUM

   TO:               Hon. James C. Dever III, Chair
                     Committee on Rules of Practice and Procedure

   FROM:             Hon. Sarah S. Vance, Chair
                     Advisory Committee on Civil Rules

   RE:               Report of the Advisory Committee on Civil Rules

   DATE:       May 6, 2026
   _____________________________________________________________________________

                                              Introduction

           The Civil Rules Advisory Committee met in Charlotte, N.C., on April 14, 2026. Members
   of the public attended in person, and public online attendance was also provided. * * *

                                                *****

           Part II of this report provides a brief update on the rule amendments for which the Advisory
   Committee unanimously voted to recommend publication for public comment. These amendments
   are part of coordinated efforts with the Appellate, Bankruptcy, and Criminal Rules Committees to
   revise their respective rules regarding privacy protections and electronic filing and are addressed
   in separate reports to the Standing Committee.




   Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                       Page 109 of 209
   August 2026
          Excerpt from the May 6, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Civil Rules


                                              *****

II.    RULES RECOMMENDED FOR PUBLICATION FOR PUBLIC COMMENT

       (a)     Rule 5.2—Privacy Protection for Filings Made with the Court

        At its April 14, 2026, meeting, the Advisory Committee unanimously recommended
publication of amendments to Rule 5.2 concerning privacy protections in court filings. The
proposed amendments would require complete redaction of social-security numbers, individual
taxpayer-identification numbers, adoption taxpayer-identification numbers, and employer
identification numbers; require the use of pseudonyms, rather than initials, to refer to minors; and
would apply these requirements to all documents in a court filing, including exhibits and
attachments. Note that the proposed amendments do not address how to address the use of a
pseudonym for a minor in a court filing once the minor ages out, but public comment may provide
insight into whether this is an issue that should be addressed in a rule rather than through protective
orders in individual cases.

       (b)     Rules 5 (Serving and Filing Pleadings and Other Papers) and 6 (Computing
               and Extending Time; Time for Motion Papers)

       The Advisory Committee also unanimously voted to recommend that amendments to
Rule 5 (and a conforming amendment to Rule 6) be published for public comment. The proposed
amendments would increase electronic access to court by self-represented litigants. These
proposed amendments are presented separately in a report by Professor Catherine T. Struve,
Consultant to the Standing Committee, that addresses amendments to the Appellate, Bankruptcy,
and Criminal Rules in addition to the Civil Rules.

                                              *****




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                          Page 110 of 209
August 2026
           Excerpt from the December 5, 2025 Report of the Advisory Committee on Civil Rules



                        COMMITTEE ON RULES OF PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
                                                   OF THE
                            JUDICIAL CONFERENCE OF THE UNITED STATES
                                        WASHINGTON, D.C. 20544


JAMES C. DEVER III                                                           CHAIRS OF ADVISORY COMMITTEES
     CHAIR
                                                                                      ALLISON H. EID
CAROLYN A. DUBAY                                                                     APPELLATE RULES
   SECRETARY
                                                                                   REBECCA B. CONNELLY
                                                                                    BANKRUPTCY RULES

                                                                                      SARAH S. VANCE
                                                                                        CIVIL RULES

                                                                                   MICHAEL W. MOSMAN
                                                                                     CRIMINAL RULES

                                                                                     JESSE M. FURMAN
                                                                                      EVIDENCE RULES



                                           MEMORANDUM

   TO:               Hon. James C. Dever III, Chair
                     Committee on Rules of Practice and Procedure

   FROM:             Hon. Sarah S. Vance, Chair
                     Advisory Committee on Civil Rules

   RE:               Report of the Advisory Committee on Civil Rules

   DATE:       December 5, 2025
   _____________________________________________________________________________

                                              Introduction

        The Civil Rules Advisory Committee met in Washington D.C., on October 24, 2025.
   Members of the public attended in person, and public online attendance was also provided. * * *

                                                *****

           Part I of this report will present the one action item on which the Advisory Committee
   voted to recommend publication in August 2026—Rule 55. The proposed amendment replaces the
   command “must” in Rules 55(a) and (b)(1) regarding entry of default and default judgment by the
   clerk with “may,” offering the clerk the alternative of referring the matter to the court. The




   Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                    Page 111 of 209
   August 2026
       Excerpt from the December 5, 2025 Report of the Advisory Committee on Civil Rules

amendment proposal is based on an extensive Federal Judicial Center study of default procedures
in the district courts, and corresponds to the actual practices in many districts.

                                              *****

I.     ACTION ITEMS

       Rule 55

        Since 1938, Rules 55(a) and (b)(1) have included the command that the clerk “must” enter
a default or default judgment in certain circumstances. Actual practice is different. For one thing,
there may be questions about whether a defending party has been properly served that may make
a command to the clerk to enter a default inappropriate. For another, with regard to a default
judgment under Rule 55(b)(1), there may be difficult questions about whether an action is for “a
sum certain or a sum that can be made certain by computation.” In particular, the possibility that
an attorney fee award is justified can present tricky questions that the clerk may be unable to
resolve with confidence. Issues can also arise with computing interest.

        An extensive study by the Federal Judicial Center revealed that default practices vary
considerably among districts. Additional information on those differences can be found at pp. 112-
16 of the agenda book for the Advisory Committee’s fall 2025 meeting via the link at the beginning
of this report. In some courts, a party seeking entry of default or default judgment is required to
give advance notice to the defending party. In one district, local rules provide that the clerk must
give notice of entry of default. Local rules prescribe different methods for seeking entry of default
or default judgment—by motion or otherwise—and prescribe the specific showings that must be
included in applications for entry of default or default judgment. At least one local rule directs the
clerk independently to verify that the time for response has expired without an answer or
appearance from the defendant. Regarding entry of default judgment, one local rule has a meet-
and-confer requirement.

        Though a nationwide set of rules on such questions might have some utility, the Advisory
Committee was not persuaded that altering local practices on all these various matters was
warranted. But the command in the rule that the clerk take actions that could impose undue burdens
on the clerk is out of step with almost all local practices. So the Advisory Committee’s conclusion
was to grant the clerk discretion to refer applications for entry of default or default judgment to
the court. That discretion is, indeed, included in some local rules and also occurs as a matter of
local practice.

        In approaching this topic, it is also useful to take account of the decreasing importance of
default practice in federal court, particularly in comparison to state courts. As the FJC study
demonstrated, the frequency of default judgments in federal civil cases has declined markedly in
the last 20 years, and is now below 2% of civil case terminations. In contrast, the rate of defaults
in state courts is very high. See Pamela Bookman, Default Procedures, 173 U. PA. L. REV. 1419,
1419-20 (2025) (reporting that in state courts default judgments are “often over 70% in debt-
collection cases * * * down from rates as high as 95% a decade ago”); see also Daniel Wilf-
Townsend, Assembly-Line Plaintiffs, 135 HARVARD L. REV. 1704 (2022). A 2020 study by the
Pew Charitable Trusts, How Debt Collectors Are Transforming the Business of State Courts, tells




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                         Page 112 of 209
August 2026
       Excerpt from the December 5, 2025 Report of the Advisory Committee on Civil Rules

a similar story about the state courts, and the American Law Institute has launched a Project on
High Volume Litigation addressed to such issues.

        Though defaults are a prominent issue in state courts, then, there is no comparable set of
issues in federal courts.

      In addition, the exercise of discretion ordinarily should be with the court. Thus, 10A FED.
PRAC. & PROC. CIV. § 2685 emphasizes the role of the court:

       When an application is made to the court under Rule 55(b)(2) for the entry of a
       judgment by default, the district judge is required to exercise sound judicial
       discretion in determining whether the judgment should be entered. The ability of
       the court to exercise its discretion and refuse to enter a default judgment is made
       effective by the two requirements of Rule 55(b)(2) that an application must be
       presented to the court for entry of judgment and that notice of the application must
       be sent to any defaulting party who has appeared.

       Additional information about this topic can be found at pp. 105-16 of the agenda book for
the Advisory Committee’s fall 2025 meeting via the link at the beginning of this report.

       Given these considerations, the Advisory Committee approved the following amendment
to Rule 55 for publication for public comment:

                                             *****




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                      Page 113 of 209
August 2026
                               PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE
                             FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE1


                  1    Rule 5. Serving and Filing Pleadings and Other Papers

                  2    (a)     Service: When Required.

                  3            (1)     In General. Unless these rules provide

                  4                    otherwise, each of the following papers must

                  5                    be served on every party:

                  6                    (A)     an order stating that service is

                  7                            required;

                  8                    (B)     a pleading filed after the original

                  9                            complaint, unless the court orders

                10                             otherwise under Rule 5(c) because

                11                             there are numerous defendants;

                12                     (C)     a discovery paper required to be

                13                             served on a party, unless the court

                14                             orders otherwise;



                               1
                                  New material is underlined in red; matter to be omitted
                       is lined through.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                               Page 114 of 209
August 2026
                       2       FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE




                15                    (D)     a written motion, except one that may

                16                            be heard ex parte; and

                17                    (E)     a written notice, appearance, demand,

                18                            or offer of judgment, or any similar

                19                            paper.

                20                               *****

                21     (b)    Service: How Made.

                22            (1)     Serving an Attorney. If a party is represented

                23                    by an attorney, service under this rule must

                24                    be made on the attorney unless the court

                25                    orders service on the party.

                26            (2)     Service by a Notice of Case Activity Sent

                27                    Through the Court’s Electronic-Filing

                28                    System. A notice of case activity sent to a

                29                    person registered to receive it through the

                30                    court’s electronic-filing system constitutes

                31                    service on that person. For any service

                32                    deadlines, service by a notice of case activity




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                           Page 115 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE                   3




                33                    is complete as of the date of filing. For any

                34                    deadlines that run from the date of service,

                35                    service by a notice of case activity is

                36                    complete as of the notice’s date. But these

                37                    qualifications apply:

                38                    (A)     such service is not effective if the filer

                39                            learns that it did not reach the person

                40                            to be served; and

                41                    (B)     a court may provide by order or local

                42                            rule that if a paper is filed under seal,

                43                            it must be served by other means.

                44            (3)     Service by Other Means in General. A paper

                45                    is may also be served under this rule by:

                46                    (A)     handing it to the person;

                47                    (B)     leaving it:

                48                            (i)     at the person’s office with a

                49                                    clerk or other person in charge

                50                                    or, if no one is in charge, in a




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                              Page 116 of 209
August 2026
                       4       FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE




                51                                    conspicuous place in the

                52                                    office; or

                53                             (ii)   if the person has no office or

                54                                    the office is closed, at the

                55                                    person’s dwelling or usual

                56                                    place of abode with someone

                57                                    of suitable age and discretion

                58                                    who resides there;

                59                    (C)     mailing it to the person’s last known

                60                            address—in which event service is

                61                            complete upon mailing;

                62                    (D)     leaving it with the court clerk if the

                63                            person has no known address;

                64                    (E)     sending it to a registered user by filing

                65                            it with the court’s electronic-filing

                66                            system or sending it by other

                67                            electronic means that the person has

                68                            consented to in writing—in either of




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                             Page 117 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE                    5




                69                            which events service is complete

                70                            upon filing or sending, but is not

                71                            effective if the filer or sender learns

                72                            that it did not reach the person to be

                73                            served; or

                74                     (F)    delivering it by any other means that

                75                            the person has consented to in

                76                            writing—in which event service is

                77                            complete when the person making

                78                            service delivers it to the agency

                79                            designated to make delivery.

                80            (3)     Using Court Facilities. [Abrogated (Apr. 26,

                81                    2018, eff. Dec. 1, 2018.]

                82            (4)     Definition of “Notice of Case Activity.” The

                83                    term “notice of case activity” includes a

                84                    notice of docket activity, a notice of

                85                    electronic filing, and any other similar

                86                    electronic    notice      provided       to   case




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                              Page 118 of 209
August 2026
                       6       FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE




                87                      participants through the court’s electronic-

                88                      filing system to inform them of activity on the

                89                      docket.

                90                                   *****

                91     (d)    Filing.

                92            (1)       Required Filings; Certificate of Service.

                93                      (A)       Papers after After the Complaint.

                94                                Any paper after the complaint that is

                95                                required to be served must be filed no

                96                                later than a reasonable time after

                97                                service. But disclosures under Rule

                98                                26(a)(1) or (2) and the following

                99                                discovery requests and responses

               100                                must not be filed until they are used

               101                                in the proceeding or the court orders

               102                                filing: depositions, interrogatories,

               103                                requests for documents or tangible

               104                                things or to permit entry onto land,




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                              Page 119 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE                 7




               105                            and requests for admission.

               106                    (B)     Certificate of Service. No certificate

               107                            of service is required when a paper is

               108                            served through the court’s electronic-

               109                            filing system under Rule 5(b)(2)by

               110                            filing it with the court’s electronic-

               111                            filing system. When a paper that is

               112                            required to be served is served by

               113                            other means:

               114                            (i)    if the paper it is filed, a

               115                                   certificate of service must be

               116                                   filed with it or within a

               117                                   reasonable time after service;

               118                                   and

               119                            (ii)   if the paper it is not filed, a

               120                                   certificate of service need not

               121                                   be filed, unless filing is

               122                                   required by court order or by




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                          Page 120 of 209
August 2026
                       8       FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE




               123                                    local rule.

               124            (2)     Nonelectronic Filing. A paper not filed

               125                    electronically is filed by delivering it:

               126                    (A)     to the clerk; or

               127                    (B)     to a judge who agrees to accept it for

               128                            filing, and who must then note the

               129                            filing date on the paper and promptly

               130                            send it to the clerk.

               131            (3)     Electronic Filing and Signing.

               132                    (A)     By      a     Represented           Person

               133                            Represented by Counsel—Generally

               134                            Required; Exceptions. A person

               135                            represented by an attorney must file

               136                            electronically, unless nonelectronic

               137                            filing is allowed by the court for good

               138                            cause or is allowed or required by

               139                            local rule.

               140                    (B)     By an Unrepresented Person Party—




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                              Page 121 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE                9




               141                            When Allowed or Required.

               142                            (i)    In General. An unrepresented

               143                                   party person not represented

               144                                   by an attorney: (i) may file

               145                                   electronically only if allowed

               146                                   by use the court’s electronic-

               147                                   filing system to file papers

               148                                   and receive notice of activity

               149                                   in the party’s case, unless a

               150                                   court order or by local rule

               151                                   prohibits the party from doing

               152                                   so.; and (ii) An unrepresented

               153                                   person may be required to file

               154                                   electronically only by court

               155                                   order in a case, or by a local

               156                                   rule that includes reasonable

               157                                   exceptions.

               158                            (ii)   Conditions and Restrictions




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                         Page 122 of 209
August 2026
                       10       FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE




               159                                   on Access. A court may set

               160                                   and        enforce         reasonable

               161                                   conditions and restrictions on

               162                                   unrepresented parties’ access

               163                                   to the court’s electronic-filing

               164                                   system (including by denying

               165                                   or revoking access for a

               166                                   particular              unrepresented

               167                                   party). But the court may not

               168                                   prohibit     all        unrepresented

               169                                   parties from using the system

               170                                   unless       that         prohibition

               171                                   includes                   reasonable

               172                                   exceptions         or     the   court

               173                                   permits the use of another

               174                                   electronic method for filing

               175                                   papers        and           receiving

               176                                   electronic notice of activity in




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                                Page 123 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE                   11




               177                                    the party’s case.

               178                    (C)     Signing. A filing made through a

               179                            person’s electronic-filing account and

               180                            authorized by that person, together

               181                            with that person’s name on a

               182                            signature    block,     constitutes   the

               183                            person’s signature.

               184                    (D)     Same as a Written Paper. A paper

               185                            filed electronically is a written paper

               186                            for purposes of these rules.

               187            (3)     Nonelectronic Filing. A paper not filed

               188                    electronically is filed by delivering it:

               189                    (A)     to the clerk; or

               190                    (B)     to a judge who agrees to accept it for

               191                            filing, and who must then note the

               192                            filing date on the paper and promptly

               193                            send it to the clerk.

               194            (4)     Acceptance by the Clerk. The clerk must not




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                             Page 124 of 209
August 2026
                       12        FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE




               195                    refuse to file a paper solely because it is not

               196                    in the form prescribed by these rules or by a

               197                    local rule or practice.

               198                           Committee Note

               199              Rule 5 is amended to address two topics concerning
               200     unrepresented parties. (Concurrent amendments are made to
               201     Bankruptcy Rules 5005, 8011, and 9036, Criminal Rule 49,
               202     and Appellate Rule 25.) Rule 5(b) is amended to address
               203     service of documents (subsequent to the complaint) filed by
               204     an unrepresented litigant in paper form. Because all such
               205     paper filings are uploaded by court staff into the court’s
               206     electronic-filing system, there is no need to require separate
               207     paper service by the filer on case participants who receive an
               208     electronic notice of the filing from the court’s electronic-
               209     filing system. Rule 5(b)’s treatment of service is also
               210     reorganized to reflect the primacy of service by means of the
               211     electronic notice. Rule 5(d) is amended to expand the
               212     availability of electronic modes by which unrepresented
               213     parties can file documents with the court and receive notice
               214     of filings that others make in the case. Also, the order of what
               215     had been Rules 5(d)(2) (“Nonelectronic Filing”) and 5(d)(3)
               216     (“Electronic Filing and Signing”) is reversed – with (d)(2)
               217     becoming (d)(3) and vice versa – to reflect the modern
               218     primacy of electronic filing. A few stylistic changes are also
               219     made.

               220             Subdivision (b). Rule 5(b) is restructured so that the
               221     primary means of service – that is, service by means of the
               222     court’s electronic-filing system – is addressed first, in
               223     subdivision 5(b)(2). Former Rule 5(b)(2) becomes new Rule
               224     5(b)(3), which continues to address alternative means of
               225     service. New Rule 5(b)(4) defines the term “notice of case




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                             Page 125 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE                  13




               226     activity” as any electronic notice provided to case
               227     participants through the court’s electronic-filing system to
               228     inform them of a filing or other activity on the docket.

               229             Subdivision (b)(2). Amended Rule 5(b)(2)
               230     eliminates the requirement of separate (paper) service (of
               231     documents after the complaint) on a litigant who is
               232     registered to receive a notice of case activity from the court’s
               233     electronic-filing system. Litigants who are registered to
               234     receive a notice of case activity include those litigants who
               235     are participating in the court’s electronic-filing system with
               236     respect to the case in question and also include those litigants
               237     who receive the notice because they have registered for a
               238     court-based electronic-noticing program. (Former Rule
               239     5(b)(2)(E)’s provision for service by “sending [a paper] to a
               240     registered user by filing it with the court’s electronic-filing
               241     system” had already eliminated the requirement of paper
               242     service on registered users of the court’s electronic-filing
               243     system by other registered users of the system; the
               244     amendment extends this exemption from paper service to
               245     those who file by a means other than through the court’s
               246     electronic-filing system.)

               247              Amended Rule 5(b)(2) provides that, for purposes of
               248     any deadlines for making service, service by a notice of case
               249     activity is complete as of the date of filing. But the amended
               250     rule provides that, for purposes of any deadlines that run
               251     from the date of service, service is complete as of the date of
               252     the notice of case activity. Thus, the amended rule ensures
               253     that if there is a delay between the date the court receives a
               254     filing not made through the electronic-filing system and the
               255     date the court uploads that filing into the electronic-filing
               256     system, that delay will not diminish the time allowed to the
               257     party whose deadline runs from the date of service.

               258            Amended Rule 5(b)(2)(A) carries forward the




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                             Page 126 of 209
August 2026
                       14        FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE




               259     provision – previously found in former Rule 5(b)(2)(E) –
               260     that service by means of the court’s electronic-filing system
               261     is not effective if the filer learns that it did not reach the
               262     person to be served.

               263             Amended Rule 5(b)(2)(B) states that a court may
               264     provide by order or local rule that if a paper is filed under
               265     seal, it must be served by other means. This sentence is
               266     designed to account for districts in which parties in the case
               267     cannot access other participants’ sealed filings via the
               268     court’s electronic-filing system.

               269             Subdivision (b)(3). Subdivision (b)(3) carries
               270     forward the contents of former Rule 5(b)(2), with two
               271     changes – one to the subdivision’s introductory phrase and
               272     the other to what becomes Rule 5(b)(3)(E).

               273              The subdivision’s introductory phrase (“A paper is
               274     served under this rule by”) is amended to read “A paper may
               275     also be served under this rule by.” This locution ensures that
               276     what will become Rule 5(b)(3) remains an option for serving
               277     any litigant, even one who receives notices of case activity.
               278     This option might be useful to litigants who will be filing
               279     non-electronically but who wish to effect service on their
               280     opponents before the time when the court will have uploaded
               281     the filing into the court’s system (thus generating the notice
               282     of case activity).

               283             Subdivision (b)(3)(E). The prior reference to
               284     “sending [a paper] to a registered user by filing it with the
               285     court’s electronic-filing system” is deleted, because this is
               286     now covered by new Rule 5(b)(2).

               287            Subdivision (b)(3)(E) carries forward – for service
               288     by other electronic means – the prior rule’s provision that
               289     such service is not effective if the sender “learns that it did




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                            Page 127 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE                  15




               290     not reach the person to be served”; a similar provision is also
               291     included in Rule 5(b)(2)(A) with respect to service via the
               292     court’s electronic-filing system.

               293             Subdivision (b)(4). New Rule 5(b)(4) defines the
               294     term “notice of case activity” as any electronic notice
               295     provided to case participants through the court’s electronic-
               296     filing system to inform them of a filing or other activity on
               297     the docket. There are two equivalent terms currently in use:
               298     Notice of Electronic Filing and Notice of Docket Activity.
               299     “Notice of case activity” is intended to encompass both of
               300     those terms, as well as any equivalent terms that may come
               301     into use in future. The word “electronic” is deleted as
               302     superfluous now that electronic filing is the default method.

               303             Subdivision (d)(1)(B). Subdivision (d)(1)(B)
               304     previously provided that no certificate of service was
               305     required when a paper was served “by filing it with the
               306     court’s electronic-filing system.” This phrase is replaced by
               307     “through the court’s electronic-filing system under Rule
               308     5(b)(2)” in order to conform to the change to subdivision
               309     (b)(2).

               310              Subdivision (d)(2)(B). Under new Rule
               311     5(d)(2)(B)(i), the presumption is the opposite of the
               312     presumption set by the prior Rule 5(d)(3)(B). That is, under
               313     new Rule 5(d)(2)(B)(i), unrepresented parties are
               314     presumptively authorized to use the court’s electronic-filing
               315     system to file documents in their case subsequent to the
               316     case’s commencement. (The rule grants this presumptive
               317     authorization to an unrepresented ‘party,’ not an
               318     unrepresented ‘person’; the rule does not grant nonparty
               319     nonlawyers any right to use the court’s e-filing system.) If a
               320     district wishes to restrict unrepresented parties’ access to the
               321     court’s electronic-filing system, it must adopt an order or
               322     local rule to impose that restriction.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                             Page 128 of 209
August 2026
                       16        FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE




               323             New Rule 5(d)(2)(B)(ii) states that the court may set
               324     reasonable conditions and restrictions on unrepresented
               325     parties’ access to the court’s electronic-filing system. For
               326     example, access to electronic filing could be allowed only to
               327     unrepresented parties who are not incarcerated (in light of
               328     the distinctive logistical considerations that apply in carceral
               329     settings), who satisfactorily complete required training
               330     and/or certifications, and who comply with any other
               331     reasonable conditions on access.

               332             New Rule 5(d)(2)(B)(ii) expressly states that a
               333     reasonable restriction would include, where appropriate,
               334     orders barring a specific unrepresented party from accessing
               335     the court’s electronic-filing system, or revoking a specific
               336     unrepresented party’s access to the court’s electronic-filing
               337     system. Another example would be a local provision stating
               338     that certain types of filings – for example, notices of appeal
               339     – cannot be filed by means of the court’s electronic-filing
               340     system.

               341             However, new Rule 5(d)(2)(B)(ii) also expressly
               342     prohibits a court from barring all unrepresented parties from
               343     using the court’s electronic-filing system, unless the court
               344     also either (1) includes reasonable exceptions to the
               345     prohibition, or (2) permits unrepresented parties to use
               346     another electronic method for filing documents (such as by
               347     email or by upload through an electronic document
               348     submission system) and an alternative electronic means for
               349     receiving notice of court filings and orders (such as an
               350     electronic noticing program). For example, local provisions
               351     that require unrepresented parties who seek to use the court’s
               352     electronic-filing system to obtain the court’s permission
               353     would count as including reasonable exceptions, so long as
               354     such permission is granted or withheld in accordance with
               355     the reasonable conditions and restrictions on access set by
               356     the court.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                             Page 129 of 209
August 2026
                         PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE FEDERAL
                              RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE1


                  1    Rule 5.2.     Privacy Protection for Filings Made with the
                  2                  Court

                  3   (a)      Redacted Filings. Unless the court orders otherwise,

                  4            in an electronic or paper filing with the court that

                  5            contains an individual’s social-security number,

                  6            taxpayer-identification number, or birth date, the

                  7            name of an individual known to be a minor, or a

                  8            financial-account number, a party or nonparty

                  9            making the filing may include only: an electronic or

                10             paper filing with the court, including any exhibit or

                11             attachment, must:

                12             (1)     the last four digits of the omit or completely

                13                     redact all social-security number and or other

                14                     taxpayer-identification numbers, including

                15                     employer-identification numbers; and


                               1
                                  New material is underlined in red; matter to be omitted
                       is lined through.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                               Page 130 of 209
August 2026
                       2            FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE




                16            (2)     if any of the following types of information

                17                    appear in the filing, include only:

                18                    (A)     the year of an the individual’s birth;

                19                    (3)(B) the minor’s initials a pseudonym in

                20                            place of the name of an individual

                21                            known to be a minor; and

                22                    (4)(C) the last four digits of the a financial-

                23                            account number.

                24     (b)    Exemptions from the Redaction Requirement.

                25            The redaction requirement does not apply to the

                26            following:

                27            (1)     a financial-account number that identifies the

                28                    property allegedly subject to forfeiture in a

                29                    forfeiture proceeding;

                30            (2)     the record of an administrative or agency

                31                    proceeding;

                32            (3)     the   official   record   of    a     state-court

                33                    proceeding;




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                             Page 131 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE                              3




                34            (4)     the record of a court or tribunal, if that record

                35                    was not subject to the redaction requirement

                36                    when originally filed;

                37            (5)     a filing covered by Rule 5.2(c) or (d); and

                38            (6)     a pro se filing in an action brought under 28

                39                    U.S.C. §§ 2241, 2254, or 2255.

                40     (c)    Limitations on Remote Access to Electronic Files;

                41            Social-Security Appeals and Immigration Cases.

                42            Unless the court orders otherwise, in an action for

                43            benefits under the Social Security Act, and in an

                44            action or proceeding relating to an order of removal,

                45            to relief from removal, or to immigration benefits or

                46            detention, access to an electronic file is authorized as

                47            follows:

                48            (1)     the parties and their attorneys may have

                49                    remote electronic access to any part of the

                50                    case file, including the administrative record;




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                             Page 132 of 209
August 2026
                       4            FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE




                51            (2)     any other person may have electronic access

                52                    to the full record at the courthouse, but may

                53                    have remote electronic access only to:

                54                    (A)      the docket maintained by the court;

                55                             and

                56                    (B)      an opinion, order, judgment, or other

                57                             disposition of the court, but not any

                58                             other part of the case file or the

                59                             administrative record.

                60     (d)    Filings Made Under Seal. The court may order that

                61            a filing be made under seal without redaction. The

                62            court may later unseal the filing or order the person

                63            who made the filing to file a redacted version for the

                64            public record.

                65     (e)    Protective Orders. For good cause, the court may

                66            by order in a case:

                67            (1)     require redaction of additional information;

                68                    or




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                          Page 133 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE                           5




                69            (2)     limit or prohibit a nonparty’s remote

                70                    electronic access to a document filed with the

                71                    court.

                72     (f)    Option for Additional Unredacted Filing Under

                73            Seal. A person making a redacted filing may also file

                74            an unredacted copy under seal. The court must retain

                75            the unredacted copy as part of the record.

                76     (g)    Option for Filing a Reference List. A filing that

                77            contains redacted information may be filed together

                78            with a reference list that identifies each item of

                79            redacted information and specifies an appropriate

                80            identifier that uniquely corresponds to each item

                81            listed. The list must be filed under seal and may be

                82            amended as of right. Any reference in the case to a

                83            listed identifier will be construed to refer to the

                84            corresponding item of information.

                85     (h)    Waiver of Protection of Identifiers. A person

                86            waives the protection of Rule 5.2(a) as to the




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                          Page 134 of 209
August 2026
                       6            FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE




                87             person’s own information by filing it without

                88             redaction and not under seal.

                89                            Committee Note

                90             In contrast to the current rule, which allows public
                91     filings to contain the last four digits of social-security and
                92     taxpayer-identification numbers, the amendment requires
                93     the omission or redaction of all digits of social-security and
                94     taxpayer-identification numbers in public filings. Recent
                95     federal policy guidance recommends avoiding the
                96     unnecessary display of any part of these numbers on forms,
                97     reports, and computers. The Committee concluded that even
                98     partial numbers are useful to identity thieves, and that the
                99     omission of these numbers from public filings will impose
               100     no hardship on either litigants or the courts. In cases in which
               101     this information is pertinent, Rule 5.2(f) allows a party to file
               102     an unredacted copy of a filing under seal.

               103             Taxpayer-identification numbers (TINs) are
               104     identification numbers used in the administration of tax
               105     laws. In addition to Social Security numbers, TINs include
               106     individual taxpayer-identification numbers (ITINs),
               107     taxpayer-identification numbers for pending U.S. Adoptions
               108     (ATINs), and employer-identification numbers (EINs).

               109             The amendment’s protection for “taxpayer-
               110     identification numbers” includes employer-identification
               111     numbers as well as individual taxpayer-identification
               112     numbers and adoption-identification numbers. Although
               113     employer-identification numbers for some corporations may
               114     be publicly available, smaller businesses and individuals
               115     who employ others have a privacy interest in these numbers,
               116     and there is also a potential for their misuse.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                              Page 135 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE                          7




               117             To enhance the protection of minors’ privacy and
               118     safety, the amendment also requires the substitution of a
               119     pseudonym, rather than initials, in place of a minor’s name
               120     in public filings. When it is feasible to do so, the use of
               121     gender-neutral pseudonyms is preferable. The use of
               122     gendered pseudonyms or pronouns, combined with other
               123     information contained in public pleadings, may make it
               124     easier to uncover the identity of a minor.

               125             The requirement for omission or redaction applies to
               126     exhibits or attachments. Parties and nonparties who include
               127     exhibits or attachments in public filings are required to
               128     review them to ensure that they do not contain information
               129     protected by the rule. But the exemptions in subsection (b)
               130     still apply to exhibits and attachments (though a protective
               131     order under subsection (e) may require additional omission
               132     or redaction).




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                         Page 136 of 209
August 2026
                               PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE
                             FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE1


                  1    Rule 6.       Computing and Extending Time; Time for
                  2                  Motion Papers

                  3                                *****

                  4    (d)     Additional Time After Certain Kinds of Service.

                  5              When a party may or must act within a specified time

                  6              after being served and service is made under Rule

                  7              5(b)(23)(C) (mail), (D) (leaving with the clerk), or

                  8              (F) (other means consented to), 3 days are added after

                  9              the period would otherwise expire under Rule 6(a).

                10                                 Committee Note

                11           Subdivision (d) is amended to conform to the
                12     renumbering of Civil Rule 5(b)(2) as Rule 5(b)(3).




                                 1
                                  New material is underlined in red; matter to be omitted
                       is lined through.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                               Page 137 of 209
August 2026
                                PROPOSED AMENDMENT TO THE
                             FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE1


                  1    Rule 55.        Default; Default Judgment

                  2    (a)     Entering a Default. When a party against whom a

                  3            judgment for affirmative relief is sought has failed to

                  4            plead or otherwise defend, and that failure is shown

                  5            by affidavit or otherwise, the clerk may eithermust

                  6            enter the party’s default or refer the matter to the

                  7            court for directions.

                  8    (b)     Entering a Default Judgment.

                  9           (1)     By the Clerk. If the plaintiff’s claim is for a

                10                    sum certain or a sum that can be made certain

                11                    by computation, the clerk—on the plaintiff’s

                12                    request, with an affidavit showing the amount

                13                    due—may eithermust:




                               1
                                  New material is underlined in red; matter to be omitted
                       is lined through.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                               Page 138 of 209
August 2026
                       2                FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE




                14                    (A)     enter judgment for that amount and

                15                            costs against a defendant who has

                16                            been defaulted for not appearing and

                17                            who is neither a minor nor an

                18                            incompetent person; or

                19                    (B)     refer the matter to the court for

                20                            directions.

                21          (2)     By the Court. In all other cases, a the party

                22                  must apply to the court for a default judgment.

                23                  A default judgment may be entered against a

                24                  minor    or   incompetent    person    only   if

                25                  represented by a general guardian, conservator,

                26                  or other like fiduciary who has appeared. If the

                27                  party against whom a default judgment is

                28                  sought has appeared personally or by a

                29                  representative, that party or its representative

                30                  must be served with written notice of the

                31                  application at least 7 days before the hearing.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                          Page 139 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE                             3




                32                  The court may conduct hearings or make

                33                  referrals—preserving any federal statutory

                34                  right to a jury trial—when, to enter or

                35                  effectuate judgment, it needs to:

                36                    (A)     conduct an accounting;

                37                    (B)     determine the amount of damages;

                38                    (C)     establish the truth of any allegation by

                39                            evidence; or

                40                    (D)     investigate any other matter.

                41                               *****

                42                           Committee Note

                43             Rules 55(a) and 55(b) are amended to remove the
                44     command that the clerk enter a default or default judgment
                45     whenever they empower the clerk to do so. A thorough study
                46     of district-court default practices by the Federal Judicial
                47     Center showed considerable variety in actual practices, and
                48     also that clerks often exercise discretion to refer the matter
                49     to the court under local rules and practices. See Emery G.
                50     Lee III & Jason A. Cantone, Fed. Jud. Ctr., Default and
                51     Default Practices in the District Courts (Mar. 2024).

                52             Rule 55(a). Because the clerk may sometimes be
                53     uncertain whether the criteria for entry of a default have been
                54     satisfied, this amendment recognizes that the clerk may refer
                55     these applications for entry of default to the court.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                            Page 140 of 209
August 2026
                       4                 FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE




                56             Rule 55(b)(1). Authority for the clerk to enter default
                57     judgment has been in the rules since they were originally
                58     promulgated. But litigation has become more complex in
                59     ways that can make it challenging to determine whether the
                60     claim is “for a sum certain or a sum that can be made certain
                61     by computation.” One recurrent issue is computation of
                62     interest when that may be included. Another is determining
                63     the amount of an attorney fee award when that is authorized
                64     either by statute or by contract. As reflected in the FJC study
                65     cited above, entry of default judgment by the clerk is now
                66     rare, and there is considerable reason to give the clerk the
                67     discretion to refer the decision to enter judgment to the court.

                68            Rule 55(b)(2). The reference to “the party” has
                69     been changed to “a party” for greater clarity. No change in
                70     meaning is intended.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                             Page 141 of 209
August 2026
                FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules   Page 142 of 209
August 2026
            Excerpt from the May 8, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules


                        COMMITTEE ON RULES OF PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
                                                    OF THE
                            JUDICIAL CONFERENCE OF THE UNITED STATES
                                      WASHINGTON, D.C. 20544

JAMES C. DEVER III                                                            CHAIRS OF ADVISORY COMMITTEES
     CHAIR
                                                                                       ALLISON H. EID
CAROLYN A. DUBAY                                                                      APPELLATE RULES
   SECRETARY
                                                                                    REBECCA B. CONNELLY
                                                                                     BANKRUPTCY RULES

                                                                                       SARAH S. VANCE
                                                                                         CIVIL RULES

                                                                                    MICHAEL W. MOSMAN
                                                                                      CRIMINAL RULES

                                                                                      JESSE M. FURMAN
                                                                                       EVIDENCE RULES



                                           MEMORANDUM

    TO:              Hon. James C. Dever III, Chair
                     Committee on Rules of Practice and Procedure

    FROM:            Hon. Michael W. Mosman, Chair
                     Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules

    RE:              Report of the Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules

    DATE:       May 8, 2026
    _____________________________________________________________________________

    I.      INTRODUCTION

            The Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules met in Washington, D.C. on April 29, 2026.
    ***

          This report presents several action items. * * * It also recommends publication for public
    comment of amendments to Rules 11 (pleas), 32 (sentencing), and 49.1 (privacy). In addition, the
    Advisory Committee unanimously recommends approval for publication amendments to Rules 49
    and 45 concerning access to electronic filing by self-represented litigants. These proposed
    amendments will be presented in a report by Professor Catherine Struve that incorporates
    amendments to the Appellate, Bankruptcy, and Civil Rules as well as the Criminal Rules.

                                                 *****



    Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                    Page 143 of 209
    August 2026
       Excerpt from the May 8, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules


III.   ITEMS FOR PUBLICATION

       A.      Rule 49.1, Reference to Minors by Pseudonyms (24-CR-A and 24-CR-C); Full
               Redaction of Social-Security Numbers (22-CR-B)

       The Advisory Committee unanimously recommends publication of amendments to
Rule 49.1 and an accompanying committee note. The proposed amendment requires:

           the substitution of pseudonyms (rather than initials) for the names of minors, and
           the omission or redaction of all digits of social-security and other taxpayer-
            identification numbers, including employer-identification numbers.

The proposed text provides:

                                             *****

        Because the privacy rules are parallel and consistent to the degree possible, a working
group convened by Ms. Dubay and including the reporters for the Appellate, Bankruptcy, and Civil
Committees has been coordinating the consideration of parallel amendments to be presented at this
meeting. The Advisory Committee has been informed that the Civil Rules Committee is
recommending amendments to Civil Rule 5.2(a) that parallel the proposed changes in Rule 49.1.
Because of the specialized needs in bankruptcy cases, the Bankruptcy Rules Committee is
recommending an amendment to Bankruptcy Rule 9037(a) that requires the substitution of
pseudonyms rather than initials for minors, but no redaction of social-security and taxpayer-
information numbers. Although the Appellate Rules Committee is considering an amendment to
add additional protections, there is no need to delay publication of the proposed amendments.
Under Federal Rule of Appellate Procedure 25(a)(5), an appeal in a case in which privacy was
governed by the bankruptcy, civil, or criminal privacy rules is governed by those rules as well on
appeal. Thus, the proposed amendments to Criminal Rule 49.1(a), Bankruptcy Rule 9037(a), and
Civil Rule 5.2(a) would govern criminal, bankruptcy, and civil appeals.

       1. Reference to Minors by Pseudonyms

        As explained in the Department of Justice’s suggestion (24-CR-A), Rule 49.1(a)(3)’s
current requirement that a filing may include only the initials of a minor does not sufficiently
ensure the privacy and safety of child victims and child witnesses, especially in crimes involving
the sexual exploitation of a child. The Department explained that child victims and witnesses may
face increased shame, embarrassment, and fear if their identity as a victim or witness becomes
publicly known, and child-exploitation offenders sometimes track federal criminal filings and take
other measures to uncover the identity of child victims and contact and harass the minors. The
American Association for Justice and the National Crime Victim Bar Association (24-CR-C)
supported the Department’s proposal, but they added the suggestion that the advisory committees
“consider the use of gender-neutral pseudonyms and pronouns as an important safety protection
for minors escaping unfathomable abuse and violence.” They state, “the use of gender, especially
when combined with the identification of adults by name or initials around the minor, makes the
true identity of minors easier to uncover.”




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                       Page 144 of 209
August 2026
         Excerpt from the May 8, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules



        The Advisory Committee’s proposed revision requires the use of pseudonyms—rather than
initials—to refer to minors in public filings. This practice is already well established among federal
prosecutors, and neither defense attorneys nor the courts reported any problems with that practice.
Because minor victims are so fearful of being identified, it is important to address this issue in the
rules. The proposed amendment does not require the use of gender-neutral pseudonyms, because
the evidence required to prove certain offenses would make that impractical. Instead, the
committee note suggests that gender neutral or other non-identifying terms should be considered
where possible.

        One question that arose during the consideration of the proposed amendment was how the
existing rule (and similar privacy provisions in the Rules of Bankruptcy and Civil Procedure)
applies to minors who reach the age of eighteen while litigation is still ongoing. Excellent research
by Lara Venegas, who was detailed to the Rules Office, found that although the Criminal, Civil,
and Bankruptcy Rules do not expressly extend protection to individuals after they have turned
eighteen, the courts have used protective orders effectively to provide continued protection. The
Advisory Committee concluded that the current practice of using protective orders to extend the
protection of minors seems to be working well, and it does not propose a change in the text of the
rule.

        Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 49.1(e) itself allows a court, for good cause, to require
the redaction of additional information through protective orders, and the commentary states that
Rule 49.1 “does not affect the protection available under other rules . . . or under other sources of
protective authority.” Fed. R. Crim. P. 49.1(e), Advisory Committee Notes. Other sources of
protective authority, too, including 18 U.S.C. § 3509(d), support courts’ routine extension of
protection of the identity of child victims even after they were no longer minors. 1

        Similarly, under the parallel privacy protections of Federal Rule of Civil
Procedure 5.2(a)(3), courts have allowed the use of redactions or pseudonyms depending on the
nature and circumstances of the case.2 Courts employ a balancing test to determine if particular
circumstances that warrant anonymity outweigh the public’s interest in open judicial proceedings.
Those circumstances include the nature of the individual, and whether they are a victim, witness,
or party to the litigation.3

1
  See, e.g., Doe v. Menefee, 391 F.3d 147, 151 n.4 (2d Cir. 2004) (“The surnames of all victims who were minors at
the time of the events in question have been redacted throughout this litigation in order to protect the victims’
privacy.”); United States v. Begay, 673 F.3d 1038, 1040 n.4 (9th Cir. 2011) (referencing 18 U.S.C. § 3509(d) when
noting continued reference by initials because the victims were previously minors).
2
 The Tenth Circuit adopted the standard established by the Eleventh Circuit: “A [party] should be permitted to proceed
anonymously only in those exceptional cases involving matters of a highly sensitive and personal nature, real danger
of physical harm, or where the injury litigated against would be incurred as a result of the disclosure of the [party’s]
identity. The risk that a [party] may suffer some embarrassment is not enough.” Femedeer v. Haun, 227 F.3d 1244,
1246 (10th Cir. 2000) (quoting Doe v. Frank, 951 F.2d 320, 324 (11th Cir. 1992)). The Third Circuit recently noted
that “minors who reach adulthood during the course of litigation may be able to justify [continued redactions] as a
result of their continuing [privacy] interests.” Ricketts v. Titusville Area Sch. Dist., 150 F.4th 634, 636 (3d Cir. 2025).
3
  For matters that may fall under analogous civil matters, Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 5.2 may be employed to
allow continued anonymous filings because courts “treat plaintiffs who were minors when their claim accrued
differently because society has a transcendent interest in safeguarding the physical and psychological well-being of a



Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                                           Page 145 of 209
August 2026
         Excerpt from the May 8, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules



       Members did express an interest in using publication as an opportunity to solicit public
comment on the question whether the rule should be revised explicitly to address the treatment of
minors who age out. Ms. Dubay and the reporters agreed to explore this possibility.

        2. Complete Redaction of Social-Security and Taxpayer-Identification Numbers

        Senator Ron Wyden has expressed concern that the privacy rules, including Rule 49.1, do
not fully protect privacy and security of Americans whose information is contained in public court
records because Rule 49.1(a)(1)—and parallel provisions in the Civil, Bankruptcy, and Appellate
Rules4—permit filings to include “the last four digits of the social-security number and taxpayer-
identification number.”

    a. Social-security numbers

        The Advisory Committee unanimously recommends that Rule 49.1 be amended to require
the redaction of all digits of any social-security numbers that are included in public pleadings.
Neither the prosecution nor the defense needs the last four digits of social-security numbers in
public filings, and this information can be misused by identity thieves and fraudsters. 5 Moreover,
full redaction is now considered a best practice by a variety of government agencies. The Advisory
Committee found this analysis very convincing, and it concluded the case had been made for
complete redaction of social-security numbers in Rule 49.1.

      Note, however, that the proposed amendment highlights the filer’s option to “omit or
completely redact all social-security . . . numbers.”

    b. Other taxpayer-identification numbers

        The Advisory Committee also recommends that all taxpayer-identification numbers be
treated like social-security numbers in public filings, i.e., the filer must either omit or completely
redact them. Although this recommendation goes beyond Senator Wyden’s original suggestion,
the Advisory Committee concluded that the underlying concern for protecting privacy applies to
these other forms of taxpayer information as well, and that the amendment should address these
privacy concerns comprehensively.




minor.” Katie M. and A.M. v. Aetna Life Ins. Co., No. 4:24-cv-00053-AMA-PK, 2025 WL 934458, at *1-2 (D. Utah
Mar. 27, 2025) (internal citations omitted); see also Doe v. USD No. 237 Smith Ctr. Sch. Dist., No. 16-cv-2801- JWL-
TJJ, 2017 WL 3839416, at *11 (D. Kan. Sep. 1, 2017) (civil suit alleging sexual assault).
4
  Federal Rule of Appellate Procedure 25(a)(5) provides that in an appeal in a case in which privacy was governed by
the bankruptcy, civil, or criminal privacy rules, those rules govern as well on appeal. Thus, Criminal Rule 49.1(a)
governs in criminal appeals.
5
  Then-Rules Law Clerk Kyle Brinker prepared an excellent research memorandum on this issue. To avoid providing
a roadmap for misuse, we have not included it in the Advisory Committee’s published reports and agenda books.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                                     Page 146 of 209
August 2026
            Excerpt from the May 8, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules


            (i)        What are taxpayer-identification numbers?

        The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) recognizes four principal types of taxpayer
identification numbers: Social-Security Numbers (SSN), Individual Taxpayer Identification
Numbers (ITIN), Adoption Taxpayer Identification Numbers (ATIN), and Employer Identification
Numbers (EIN).6

       The most common form of taxpayer-identification number other than an SSN is the ITIN.
The IRS requires any individual who is not eligible to get a social-security number to apply for an
ITIN under many circumstances, including filing a U.S. federal tax return.7 As of December 2023,
the IRS had issued 26 million ITINs, and there were more than 5.8 million active ITINs. 8 ITINs
are now commonly used for a variety of non-tax purposes, including obtaining drivers’ licenses
and credit cards, and opening bank accounts, and establishing a credit history. 9

            (ii)       The history of the privacy rules and taxpayer-identification-numbers

        The history of the treatment of taxpayer-identification numbers in Rule 49.1 and the
parallel Bankruptcy and Civil Rules indicates that the drafters of the rules intended to require
redaction of ITINs, but not EINs, and did not consider ATINs.

        Although the Department of Justice initially opposed applying the same privacy redaction
rules to social-security and taxpayer identification numbers, the E-Government Subcommittee
“determined that tax identification numbers raise the same privacy concerns as social security


6
  The IRS website also recognizes a Preparer Tax Identification Number (PTIN) as a type of taxpayer identification
number. A memo prepared for the Advisory Committee by Former Rules Law Clerk Kyle Brinker also discussed
PTINs, noting that these numbers were created to allow tax preparers to shield their own SSNs, and concluding that
they do not raise the same privacy issues as ITINs, ATINs, and EINs.
7
    The IRS website states:
       You may need an ITIN if you’re a:
                  Nonresident alien claiming a tax treaty benefit
                  Nonresident alien filing a U.S. federal tax return
                  Resident alien filing a U.S. federal tax return
                  Dependent or spouse of a U.S. citizen/resident alien
                  Nonresident alien student, professor or researcher filing a U.S. federal tax return or claiming an
                   exception
                  Dependent or spouse of a nonresident alien U.S. visa holder.
IRS, Individual taxpayer identification number, https://www.irs.gov/tin/itin/individual-taxpayer-identification-
number-itin#what (last visited Apr. 12, 2026).
8
 Treasury Inspector Gen. for Tax Admin., Administration of the Individual Taxpayer Identification Number Program
(Rep.   No.    2024-400-012),      1    (2023),    https://www.oversight.gov/sites/default/files/documents/reports/
2023-12/2024400012fr.pdf (last visited Apr. 11, 2026).
9
    Id. at 1-2.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                                             Page 147 of 209
August 2026
           Excerpt from the May 8, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules


numbers; for many individuals, those numbers are the same.” 10 The E-Government Subcommittee
also considered whether EINs should be included as identifiers to be redacted, 11 and it “discussed
whether an EIN raised the same privacy risks as social security or tax identification numbers.” 12
A Subcommittee member stated that an EIN “did not present the same privacy concerns” because
it “was solely used to file taxes.”13 The Subcommittee then agreed and decided not to include EINs
in the list of redacted identifiers.14 A “person’s . . . tax identification number” was changed to an
“individual’s . . . tax identification number” to clarify that corporate tax identification numbers are
not subject to the redaction requirement. 15

           (iii)   Reasons to require omission or redaction of all taxpayer identification numbers

        At its April meeting, the Advisory Committee concluded that Rule 49.1(a) should afford
the same protection to ITINs, ATINs, and EINs that it provides to social-security numbers—
requiring full redaction in public filings if any of these taxpayer-identification numbers are
included. The Advisory Committee was persuaded that inclusion of these numbers in public filings
in criminal cases raised some threat to privacy and risk of misuse, and that tolerating these potential
harms was not justified by any countervailing need for inclusion.

        ITINs and ATINs. What sparse caselaw there is interpreting the phrase “an individual’s . . .
taxpayer-identification number,”16 suggests that the existing rule likely already includes ITINs and
possibly ATINs. As noted above, the E-Government Subcommittee clearly intended the privacy
rules to encompass individual taxpayer identification numbers. Moreover, bankruptcy forms
support the view that the parallel privacy rules always intended “individual’s . . . taxpayer-
identification number” to include ITINs. For example, the Bankruptcy Official Form 21 was
amended in 2007 to instruct debtors to state whether the debtor had an “Individual Taxpayer
Identification (ITIN) Number(s),” and if so, to provide it. 17 The committee note stated that the
amendment instructing debtors to provide their ITINs was made “[i]n light of the new Rule 9037
which limits public disclosure to all but the last four digits of any individual taxpayer-identification



10
  Revised Privacy Template, in Agenda Book for Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules, Oct. 30, 2004 at 105 n.3,
available at https://www.uscourts.gov/sites/default/files/fr_import/CR2004-10.pdf).
11
  Minutes of the June 16, 2004 E-Government Subcomm. Meeting, in Agenda Book for Advisory Committee on
Criminal Rules, Oct. 30, 2004, at 119, available at https://www.uscourts.gov/sites/default/files/fr_import/
CR2004-10.pdf).
12
     Id.
13
     Id.
14
     Id.
15
  Revised Privacy Template, in Agenda Book for Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules, Apr. 4-5, 2005, at 129,
available at https://www.uscourts.gov/sites/default/files/fr_import/CR2005-04.pdf).
16
  Only one case was identified as applying the privacy rules to an ITIN; it assumed that Criminal Rule 49.1(a) covers
ITINs. United States v. Valdez-Morales, No. 3:15-CR-56, 2016 WL 919029, at *4 (E.D. Tenn. Mar. 4, 2016).
17
   Official Form 21: Statement of Social Security Number or Individual Taxpayer Identification Number (ITIN), in
Agenda Book for Committee on Rules of Practice and Procedure, June 22-23, 2006, at 794, available at
https://www.uscourts.gov/sites/default/files/fr_import/ST2006-06.pdf).




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                                      Page 148 of 209
August 2026
           Excerpt from the May 8, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules


number.”18 Several Directors Forms were also changed to require ITIN information “in order to
comply with” Bankruptcy Rule 9037.”19 Current bankruptcy case policy likewise instructs debtors
to redact ITINs in order to comply with Bankruptcy Rule 9037. The bankruptcy case policy
provides that, “according to the criteria provided in Fed. R. Bankr. P. 9037,” only the last four
digits of an ITIN should appear if an individual has an ITIN instead of a social security number. 20

       Like SSNs, ITINs are now frequently employed for a variety of non-tax purposes. 21
Disclosure may thus provide a similar opportunity for misuse by persons with fraudulent or
malicious purposes. And although there is little information about how helpful the last four digits
of an ITIN would be to those with nefarious purposes, the Advisory Committee’s investigation
uncovered no reason such numbers were needed in criminal filings.

          As a temporary number assigned to a child during adoption to permit the parents to claim
tax benefits (such as dependency exemptions and childcare credits), an ATIN appears to pose less
risk of harm to privacy than the disclosure of SSNs and ITINs, and is less likely to appear in filings
in criminal cases. The Advisory Committee concluded, however, that all taxpayer identification
numbers deserved protection and found no reason to exempt ATINs.

         EINs. The Advisory Committee considered but was not persuaded by the Department of
Justice’s preference not to require redaction for EINs, whether personal or corporate, and ATINs.
In the Advisory Committee’s view, EINs may raise an interest in individual privacy, especially
when used by families who employ domestic workers and by sole proprietorships and small
businesses. Although a tax-exempt organization or public company must disclose its EIN in public
filings,22 and a company may provide its EIN to employees or to vendors, 23 otherwise EINs are
not public, which supports the view that their disclosure raises privacy risks. The IRS will not
disclose an EIN unless the EIN holder gives its consent, the party requesting the EIN has a material
interest in its disclosure, or the IRS is otherwise required to do so. 24 The IRS also provides for

18
  Admin. Off. of the U.S. Cts., Official Form 21 - Cumulative Committee Note, https://www.uscourts.gov/sites/
default/files/b_021_cn_cum.pdf (last visited Apr. 9, 2025).
19
   Memorandum from Jeff Morris, Reporter, to Advisory Comm. on Bankr. Rules, in Agenda Book for Advisory
Committee on Bankruptcy Rules, Mar. 29-30, 2007, at 258, available at https://www.uscourts.gov/
sites/default/files/fr_import/BK2007-03.pdf).
20
     Vol. 4: Court and Case Management] Guide to Judiciary Policy, ch. 8 § 830.50(b).
21
  “Contrary to its intended use for Federal tax purposes, an ITIN has become widely accepted by third parties outside
of the IRS for use as a valid identification number for many nontax purposes.” Administration of the Individual
Taxpayer Identification Number Program, supra note 18, at 1.
22
   See IRS, Public Disclosure and Availability of Exempt Organization Returns and Applications: Public Disclosure
Overview,       https://www.irs.gov/charities-non-profits/public-disclosure-and-availability-of-exempt-organization-
returns-and-applications-public-disclosure-overview (last visited Apr. 9, 2026); Secs. and Exch. Comm’n, Off. of
Investor Educ. and Advoc., Investor Bulletin: How To Read a 10-K (Sept. 2011), https://www.sec.gov/files/
reada10k.pdf (last visited Apr. 12, 2026).
23
   See IRS, About Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement, https://www.irs.gov/forms-pubs/about-form-w-2 (last visited
Apr. 9, 2026); Wolters Kluwer, Do You Need an EIN or FEIN for Your Business? (June 29, 2023),
https://www.wolterskluwer.com/en/expert-insights/business-ein-your-federal-tax-id-number.
24
     See 26 U.S.C. § 6103; Highland Cap. Mgmt., LP v. IRS, 408 F. Supp. 3d 789, 806 (N.D. Tex. 2019).




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                                      Page 149 of 209
August 2026
           Excerpt from the May 8, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules


truncated EINs on statements and other documents.25 Similarly, the U.S. Tax Court’s privacy
protection rule requires omission or redaction of all “[t]axpayer identification numbers (e.g., Social
Security numbers or employer identification numbers)” in court filings.26 The Advisory
Committee felt these institutions had a good appreciation of the risks, and that the Tax Court’s
Rules—which require complete redaction—were a good model.

         Moreover, whatever the situation in 2007, when the rule was first promulgated, EINs are
now widely used for non-tax purposes, such as opening bank accounts and applying for credit. 27
Given these functions, disclosing a sole proprietorship’s EIN raises a risk of fraudulent use.
Although the Department reported that it had found no evidence of any problems with fraud or
identity theft with any tax numbers other than SSNs and ITINs, the Advisory Committee noted
reports from the Government Accountability Office and the Treasury Inspector General for Tax
Administration that described the use of stolen EINs to fraudulently obtain tax refunds owed to
existing businesses or file false W-2s, 28 and members expressed continuing concern that EINs
could be misused. Members also expressed the view that the rules should not facilitate fraud, and
they should be proactive, given the rapidly changing forms of fraud being developed using new
technologies. And members reiterated the point that even if fraud is not a significant concern, there
is an interest in individual privacy, especially in the case of EINs for families and small businesses.

        The Advisory Committee favored a simple, uniform rule that treated all Social-Security
numbers and all taxpayer-identification numbers the same, requiring their full redaction in all
public filings, thus better protecting privacy and reducing the risk of fraud.



25
     26 C.F.R. § 301.6109-4(a)-(b).
26
  Fed. Tax Ct. R. 27(a)(1) (emphasis added). The explanation accompanying the rule states: “The Judicial Conference
privacy policy applies to protect only individual privacy. The Court believes, however, that the same privacy and
security interests of corporations, trusts, estates, and other entities as those of individuals should be protected in this
Court. Consequently, the Court amends its Rules and petition forms to eliminate the requirement of providing any part
of the taxpayer identification number, and to extend the protection to any party or nonparty.” Explanation to Fed. Tax
Ct. R. 27(a)(1).
27
   See IRS, Employer Identification Number, https://www.irs.gov/businesses/employer-identification-number#needs
(last visited Apr. 12, 2026).
28
  Stolen EINs can be used in at least two distinct forms of tax fraud. Most straightforwardly, a stolen EIN can be
used to fraudulently obtain a tax refund owed to an existing business. A 2020 GAO study found that the IRS’s
computerized filters identified almost 8,000 such cases of confirmed business identity theft, claiming $384 million
in fraudulent refunds, from January 2017 to August 2019. GAO, Identity Theft: IRS Needs to Better Assess the Risks
of Refund Fraud on Business-Related Returns (GAO Rep. 20-174) (Jan. 30, 2020), https://www.gao.gov/
products/gao-20-174. The study did not estimate how many fraudulent returns made it past the IRS filtering
software. See id.
          In a more involved form of fraud, a stolen EIN can be used to file false W-2s which report tax withholding
that never occurred. The false W-2s are then used to file multiple fraudulent personal returns claiming refunds based
on the fictitious withholding. Obviously, this poses a financial harm to the government: in 2013, Treasury Inspector
General for Tax Administration (TIGTA) identified 277,624 stolen EINs used on individual tax returns claiming $2.2
billion in fraudulent refunds in TY 2011. Treasury Inspector Gen. for Tax Admin., Off. of Audit, Stolen and Falsely
Obtained Employer Identification Numbers Are Used to Report False Income and Withholding (Sep. 23, 2013),
https://content.govdelivery.com/accounts/USTREASTIGTA/bulletins/984411.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                                           Page 150 of 209
August 2026
         Excerpt from the May 8, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules


         3. Attachments and exhibits

        The proposed amendment requires redaction or omission of “an electronic or paper filing,
including any exhibit or attachment.” The Advisory Committee supports including this phrase
because the Federal Judicial Center’s research showed that the majority of improperly included
social-security numbers appear in attachments or exhibits, not in the main filing. The inclusion in
the text would serve as a reminder that counsel must review all exhibits and attachments to ensure
compliance with the privacy rule.

        The Advisory Committee recognized the concern that the explicit inclusion of this phrase
might create a negative implication for other rules. That appears not to be a major consideration
for the Criminal Rules. Although the word “filing” appears 50 times in the Criminal Rules, all
Criminal Rules other than Rule 49.1 use this word as a verb, not as a noun. 29 When referring to the
action of filing, there seems to be little or no chance of confusion arising from this clarification in
Rule 49.1.

         B.       Rule 11, Advice to Defendants (25-CR-N)

     Judge Patricia Barksdale wrote suggesting that Rule 11 be amended to address recent
amendments to the Federal Sentencing Guidelines. 30 Rule 11(b)(1)(M) now provides:

                  (b) Considering and Accepting a Guilty or Nolo Contendere Plea.

                  (1) Advising and Questioning the Defendant. Before the court accepts a
                      plea of guilty or nolo contendere, the defendant may be placed under
                      oath, and the court must address the defendant personally in open court.
                      During this address, the court must inform the defendant of, and
                      determine that the defendant understands, the following:

                                                 * * * * *

                            (M) in determining a sentence, the court’s obligation to calculate the
                            applicable sentencing-guideline range and to consider that range,
                            possible departures under the Sentencing Guidelines, and other
                            sentencing factors under 18 U.S.C. §3553(a); . . .

       The Advisory Committee unanimously recommends publication of amendments to
Rules 11 and 32 that reflect the 2025 amendments to the Sentencing Guidelines.




29
   We read the word “filing” in Rule 56 as a verb, although it could be interpreted as a noun. It reads, “A district court
is considered always open for any filing and for issuing returning process, making a motion, or entering an order.”
30
  Judge Barksdale submitted her suggestion while the amendment was pending. It went into effect on November 1,
2025.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                                          Page 151 of 209
August 2026
       Excerpt from the May 8, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules


       1. The 2025 Guideline Amendments

       The 2025 amendments to the U.S. Sentencing Commission eliminated the term
“departure.” The amendments deleted language in U.S.S.G. § 1B1.1(b) that formerly required the
sentencing court to consider “Parts H and K of Chapter Five, Specific Offender Characteristics
and Departures.” It also deleted most departures previously provided throughout the Guidelines
Manual and made other related changes to Chapter 5.

      In its summary of the 2025 amendments, the Commission explained the rationale for the
changes regarding departures:

       In the years since Booker, the frequency of departures has steadily declined with courts
       relying to a greater extent on variances in a manner consistent with the statutory
       requirements in section 3553(a). The shift away from departures deepened as a direct result
       of the holding in Irizarry v. United States, 553 U.S. 708 (2008), in which the Court held
       that the “reasonable notice” requirement in Rule 32(h) of the Federal Rules of Criminal
       Procedure does not apply to variances.

U.S. Sentencing Comm’n, Amends. to the Sentencing Guidelines, April 30, 2025, at 79. The
amendments sought to “better align the guidelines to practices under current sentencing law and
to acknowledge the growing shift away from the use of departures.” Id. at 80. With the exception
of the provisions pertaining to substantial assistance under §5K1.1 and to early disposition
programs in § 5K3.1, the other departure provisions formerly included in Chapter 5 were
eliminated.

       Although the 2025 Guidelines retained § 5K1.1, § 5K1.1 no longer uses the term
“departure.” Rather, it provides:

       Upon motion of the government stating that the defendant has provided substantial
       assistance in the investigation or prosecution of another person who has committed an
       offense, a sentence that is below the otherwise applicable guideline range may be
       appropriate.

        Given the change in the Guidelines, the subcommittee concluded that Rules 11(b)(M) and
32(h) require revision.

       2. Rule 11(b)(M)–Revision and Proposed Committee Note

        The Advisory Committee recommends that Rule 11(b)(M) be amended to remove the
requirement that the court advise the defendant at the plea proceeding of “the court’s obligation to
… consider . . . possible departures under the Sentencing Guidelines.” Its recommendation reflects
the revised instructions in U.S.S.G. § 1B1.1(b), which now provides:

      STEP TWO: CONSIDERATION OF FACTORS SET FORTH IN 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a).—
      After determining the kinds of sentence and guidelines range pursuant to subsection (a) of
      § 1B1.1 (Application Instructions) and 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a)(4) and (5), the court shall
      consider the other applicable factors in 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a) to determine a sentence that is



Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                       Page 152 of 209
August 2026
       Excerpt from the May 8, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules


      sufficient, but not greater than necessary, to comply with the purposes of sentencing.
      Specifically, as set forth in 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a), in determining the particular sentence to
      be imposed, the court shall also consider—

             (1) the nature and circumstances of the offense and the history and characteristics of
                     the defendant;

             (2) the need for the sentence imposed to meet the purposes of sentencing listed in 18
                     U.S.C. § 3553(a)(2);

             (3) the kinds of sentences available;

             (4) the need to avoid unwarranted sentence disparities among defendants

              with similar records who have been found guilty of similar conduct; and

             (5) the need to provide restitution to any victims of the offense.

After considering various options, the Advisory Committee concluded that the following language
best reflects the current two-step sentencing process:

                                             *****

       3. Rule 32(h)–Deletion and Proposed Committee Note

       Because the Guidelines no longer employ the concept of departures, the Advisory
Committee also recommends amending Rule 32 to eliminate paragraph (h), which currently
provides:

       (h) Notice of Possible Departure from Sentencing Guidelines. Before the court may
       depart from the applicable sentencing range on a ground not identified for departure either
       in the presentence report or in a party’s prehearing submission, the court must give the
       parties reasonable notice that it is contemplating such a departure. The notice must specify
       any ground on which the court is contemplating a departure.

To avoid renumbering (relettering) of the remainder of Rule 32, the Advisory Committee
recommends that subdivision (h) be reserved. The proposed amendment to Rule 32(h) would
provide:

                                             *****

       C.      Rules 49 and 45, electronic filing by a self-represented party

    The Advisory Committee’s recommendation that amendments to Rules 49 and 45 be published
will be presented by Professor Struve in a comprehensive report.

                                             *****




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                      Page 153 of 209
August 2026
                         PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE FEDERAL
                            RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE 1


                  1    Rule 11.         Pleas

                  2                                 *****

                  3    (b)    Considering and Accepting a Guilty or Nolo

                  4           Contendere Plea.

                  5           (1)       Advising and Questioning the Defendant.

                  6                     Before the court accepts a plea of guilty or

                  7                     nolo contendere, the defendant may be placed

                  8                     under oath, and the court must address the

                  9                     defendant personally in open court. During

                10                      this address, the court must inform the

                11                      defendant of, and determine that the

                12                      defendant understands, the following:

                13                                  *****

                14                       (M)     in determining a sentence, the court’s

                15                               obligation to calculate the applicable


                              1
                                  Matter to be omitted is lined through.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                             Page 154 of 209
August 2026
                       2    FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE




                16                            sentencing-guideline range and to

                17                            consider    that    range,    possible

                18                            departures under the Sentencing

                19                            Guidelines, and other sentencing

                20                            factors under 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a);

                21                               *****

                22                           Committee Note

                23             The amendment reflects the 2025 changes to the U.S.
                24     Sentencing Guidelines, which (1) deleted most of the
                25     provisions in Chapter Five, Part K (Departures), and
                26     (2) revised U.S.S.G. § 1B1.1(a) to eliminate the requirement
                27     that the court consider departures at step two of a three-step
                28     sentencing process. As revised, § 1B1.1 now provides for a
                29     two-step process, considering at step one “the kinds of
                30     sentence and the guideline range as set forth in the
                31     guidelines,” and at step two “other applicable factors in 18
                32     U.S.C. § 3553(a).”




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                           Page 155 of 209
August 2026
                         PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE FEDERAL
                            RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE1


                  1    Rule 32.        Sentencing and Judgment

                  2                                *****

                  3    (h)     [Reserved] Notice of Possible Departure from

                  4            Sentencing Guidelines. Before the court may depart

                  5            from the applicable sentencing range on a ground not

                  6            identified for departure either in the presentence

                  7            report or in a party’s prehearing submission, the

                  8            court must give the parties reasonable notice that it is

                  9            contemplating such a departure. The notice must

                10             specify any ground on which the court is

                11             contemplating a departure.

                12                                 *****

                13                            Committee Note

                14            The amendment reflects developments in the
                15     Supreme Court and the Sentencing Guidelines that
                16     eliminated the need for notice regarding departures.

                               1
                                  New material is underlined in red; matter to be omitted
                       is lined through.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                               Page 156 of 209
August 2026
                             PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE
                         FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE1


                  1    Rule 45.        Computing and Extending Time

                  2                                *****

                  3    (c)     Additional Time After Certain Kinds of Service.

                  4            Whenever a party must or may act within a specified

                  5            time after being served and service is made under

                  6            Rule 49(a)(4)(C), (D), and (E) (F), 3 days are added

                  7            after the period would otherwise expire under

                  8            subdivision (a).

                  9                           Committee Note

                10            Subdivision (c) is amended to conform to the
                11     renumbering of Criminal Rule 49(a)(4)(E) as
                12     Rule 49(a)(4)(F).




                               1
                                  New material is underlined in red; matter to be omitted
                       is lined through.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                               Page 157 of 209
August 2026
                             PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE
                         FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE1


                  1    Rule 49.        Serving and Filing Papers

                  2    (a)     Service on a Party.

                  3            (1)     What is Required. Each of the following

                  4                    must be served on every party: any written

                  5                    motion (other than one to be heard ex parte),

                  6                    written notice, designation of the record on

                  7                    appeal, or similar paper.

                  8            (2)     Serving a Party’s Attorney. Unless the court

                  9                    orders otherwise, when these rules or a court

                10                     order requires or permits service on a party

                11                     represented by an attorney, service must be

                12                     made on the attorney instead of the party.

                13             (3)     Service by Electronic Means a Notice of

                14                     Case Activity Sent Through the Court’s



                               1
                                  New material is underlined in red; matter to be omitted
                       is lined through.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                               Page 158 of 209
August 2026
                       2       FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE




                15                    Electronic-Filing System. A notice of case

                16                    activity sent to a person registered to receive

                17                    it through the court’s electronic-filing system

                18                    constitutes service on that person. For any

                19                    service deadlines, service by a notice of case

                20                    activity is complete as of the date of filing.

                21                    For any deadlines that run from the date of

                22                    service, service by a notice of case activity is

                23                    complete as of the notice’s date. But these

                24                    qualifications apply:

                25                    (A)     such service is not effective if the filer

                26                            learns that it did not reach the person

                27                            to be served; and

                28                    (B)     a court may provide by order or local

                29                            rule that if a paper is filed under seal,

                30                            it must be served by other means.

                31                    (A)     Using the Court’s Electronic-Filing

                32                            System. A party represented by an




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                              Page 159 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE                         3




                33                            attorney may serve a paper on a

                34                            registered user by filing it with the

                35                            court’s electronic-filing system. A

                36                            party not represented by an attorney

                37                            may do so only if allowed by court

                38                            order or local rule. Service is

                39                            complete upon filing, but is not

                40                            effective if the serving party learns

                41                            that it did not reach the person to be

                42                            served.

                43                    (B)     Using Other Electronic Means. A

                44                            paper may be served by any other

                45                            electronic means that the person

                46                            consented to in writing. Service is

                47                            complete upon transmission, but is

                48                            not effective if the serving party

                49                            learns that it did not reach the person

                50                            to be served.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                           Page 160 of 209
August 2026
                       4       FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE




                51            (4)     Service by Nonelectronic Other Means. A

                52                    paper may also be served by:

                53                    (A)     handing it to the person;

                54                    (B)     leaving it:

                55                            (i)     at the person’s office with a

                56                                    clerk or other person in charge

                57                                    or, if no one is in charge, in a

                58                                    conspicuous place in the

                59                                    office; or

                60                            (ii)    if the person has no office or

                61                                    the office is closed, at the

                62                                    person’s dwelling or usual

                63                                    place of abode with someone

                64                                    of suitable age and discretion

                65                                    who resides there;

                66                    (C)     mailing it to the person’s last known

                67                            address—in which event service is

                68                            complete upon mailing;




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                            Page 161 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE                         5




                69                    (D)     leaving it with the court clerk if the

                70                            person has no known address; or

                71                    (E)     sending it by electronic means that

                72                            the person has consented to in writing

                73                            – in which event service is complete

                74                            upon sending, but is not effective if

                75                            the sender learns that it did not reach

                76                            the person to be served; or

                77                    (E)(F) delivering it by any other means that

                78                            the person has consented to in

                79                            writing—in which event service is

                80                            complete when the person making

                81                            service delivers it to the agency

                82                            designated to make delivery.

                83            (5)     Definition of “Notice of Case Activity.” The

                84                    term “notice of case activity” includes a

                85                    notice of docket activity, a notice of

                86                    electronic filing, and any other similar




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                           Page 162 of 209
August 2026
                       6       FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE




                87                      electronic     notice   provided    to    case

                88                      participants through the court’s electronic-

                89                      filing system to inform them of activity on the

                90                      docket.

                91     (b)    Filing.

                92            (1)       When Required; Certificate of Service. Any

                93                      paper that is required to be served must be

                94                      filed no later than a reasonable time after

                95                      service. No certificate of service is required

                96                      when a paper is served by filing it with the

                97                      court’s electronic-filing system through the

                98                      court’s electronic-filing system under Rule

                99                      49(a)(3). When a paper is served by other

               100                      means, a certificate of service must be filed

               101                      with it or within a reasonable time after

               102                      service or filing.

               103            (2)       Means of Electronic Filing and Signing.

               104                      (A)       By a Party Represented by Counsel –




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                             Page 163 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE                         7




               105                            Generally Required; Exceptions. A

               106                            party represented by an attorney must

               107                            file       electronically,      unless

               108                            nonelectronic filing is allowed by the

               109                            court for good cause or is allowed or

               110                            required by local rule.

               111                    (B)     By a Self-Represented Party – When

               112                            Allowed.

               113                            (i)    In General. A self-represented

               114                                   party may use the court’s

               115                                   electronic-filing system to file

               116                                   papers and receive notice of

               117                                   activity in the party’s case,

               118                                   unless a court order or local

               119                                   rule prohibits the party from

               120                                   doing so.

               121                            (ii)   Conditions and Restrictions

               122                                   on Access. A court may set




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                           Page 164 of 209
August 2026
                       8       FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE




               123                                   and        enforce            reasonable

               124                                   conditions and restrictions on

               125                                   self-represented                parties’

               126                                   access       to         the      court’s

               127                                   electronic-filing                system

               128                                   (including by denying or

               129                                   revoking          access        for   a

               130                                   particular         self-represented

               131                                   party). But the court may not

               132                                   prohibit all self-represented

               133                                   parties from using the system

               134                                   unless       that          prohibition

               135                                   includes                      reasonable

               136                                   exceptions         or     the      court

               137                                   permits the use of another

               138                                   electronic method for filing

               139                                   papers        and              receiving

               140                                   electronic notice of activity in




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                                   Page 165 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE                            9




               141                                     the party’s case.

               142                    (C)     Means of Filing. Electronically. A

               143                            paper is filed electronically by filing

               144                            it with the court’s electronic-filing

               145                            system.

               146                    (D)     Signature. A filing made through a

               147                            person’s electronic-filing account and

               148                            authorized by that person, together

               149                            with the person’s name on a signature

               150                            block,    constitutes       the   person’s

               151                            signature.

               152                    (E)     Qualifies as Written Paper. A paper

               153                            filed electronically is written or in

               154                            writing under these rules.

               155            (B)(3) Nonelectronically Filing. A paper not filed

               156                    electronically is filed by delivering it:

               157                            (i)      to the clerk; or

               158                            (ii)     to a judge who agrees to




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                              Page 166 of 209
August 2026
                       10       FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE




               159                                    accept it for filing, and who

               160                                    must then note the filing date

               161                                    on the paper and promptly

               162                                    send it to the clerk.

               163            (3)     Means      Used       by    Represented    and

               164                    Unrepresented Parties.

               165                    (A)     Represented        Party.   A     party

               166                            represented by an attorney must file

               167                            electronically, unless nonelectronic

               168                            filing is allowed by the court for good

               169                            cause or is allowed or required by

               170                            local rule.

               171                    (B)     Unrepresented Party. A party not

               172                            represented by an attorney must file

               173                            nonelectronically, unless allowed to

               174                            file electronically by court order or

               175                            local rule.

               176            (4)     Signature. Every written motion and other




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                           Page 167 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE                        11




               177                    paper must be signed by at least one attorney

               178                    of record in the attorney’s name—or by a

               179                    person filing a paper if the person is not

               180                    represented by an attorney. The paper must

               181                    state the signer’s address, e-mail address, and

               182                    telephone number. Unless a rule or statute

               183                    specifically states otherwise, a pleading need

               184                    not be verified or accompanied by an

               185                    affidavit. The court must strike an unsigned

               186                    paper unless the omission is promptly

               187                    corrected after being called to the attorney’s

               188                    or person’s attention.

               189            (5)     Acceptance by the Clerk. The clerk must not

               190                    refuse to file a paper solely because it is not

               191                    in the form prescribed by these rules or by a

               192                    local rule or practice.

               193     (c)    Service and Filing by Nonparties. A nonparty may

               194            serve and file a paper only if doing so is required or




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                           Page 168 of 209
August 2026
                       12       FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE




               195            permitted by law. A nonparty must serve every party

               196            as required by Rule 49(a), but may use the court’s

               197            electronic-filing system only if allowed by court

               198            order or local rule.

               199     (d)    Notice of a Court Order. When the court issues an

               200            order on any post-arraignment motion, the clerk must

               201            serve notice of the entry on each party as required by

               202            Rule 49(a). A party also may serve notice of the entry

               203            by the same means. Except as Federal Rule of

               204            Appellate Procedure 4(b) provides otherwise, the

               205            clerk’s failure to give notice does not affect the time

               206            to appeal, or relieve—or authorize the court to

               207            relieve—a party’s failure to appeal within the

               208            allowed time.

               209                            Committee Note

               210             Rule 49 is amended to address two topics concerning
               211     self-represented parties. (Concurrent amendments are made
               212     to Bankruptcy Rules 5005, 8011, and 9036, Civil Rule 5, and
               213     Appellate Rule 25.) Rule 49(a) is amended to address service
               214     of documents filed by a self-represented litigant in paper
               215     form. Because all such paper filings are uploaded by court




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                           Page 169 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE                         13




               216     staff into the court’s electronic-filing system, there is no
               217     need to require separate paper service by the filer on case
               218     participants who receive an electronic notice of the filing
               219     from the court’s electronic-filing system. Rule 49(b) is
               220     amended to expand the availability of electronic modes by
               221     which self-represented parties can file documents with the
               222     court and receive notice of filings that others make in the
               223     case.

               224             Subdivision (a)(3). Rule 49(a)(3) is revised so that it
               225     focuses solely on the service of notice by means of the
               226     court’s electronic-filing system. What had been Rule
               227     49(a)(3)(B) (concerning “other electronic means” of service)
               228     is relocated, as revised, to a new Rule 49(a)(4)(E).

               229             Amended Rule 49(a)(3) eliminates the requirement
               230     of separate (paper) service on a litigant who is registered to
               231     receive a notice of case activity from the court’s electronic-
               232     filing system. Litigants who are registered to receive a notice
               233     of case activity include those litigants who are participating
               234     in the court’s electronic-filing system with respect to the
               235     case in question and also include those litigants who receive
               236     the notice because they have registered for a court-based
               237     electronic-noticing program. (Former Rule 49(a)(3)(A)’s
               238     provision for service by “on a registered user by filing [the
               239     paper] with the court’s electronic-filing system” had already
               240     eliminated the requirement of paper service on registered
               241     users of the court’s electronic-filing system by other
               242     registered users of the system; the amendment extends this
               243     exemption from paper service to those who file by a means
               244     other than through the court’s electronic-filing system.)

               245            Amended Rule 49(a)(3) provides that, for purposes
               246     of any deadlines for making service, service by a notice of
               247     case activity is complete as of the date of filing. But the
               248     amended rule provides that, for purposes of any deadlines




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                            Page 170 of 209
August 2026
                       14        FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE




               249     that run from the date of service, service is complete as of
               250     the date of the notice of case activity. Thus, the amended rule
               251     ensures that if there is a delay between the date the court
               252     receives a filing not made through the electronic-filing
               253     system and the date the court uploads that filing into the
               254     electronic-filing system, that delay will not diminish the time
               255     allowed to the party whose deadline runs from the date of
               256     service.

               257             Amended Rule 49(a)(3)(A) continues to provide that
               258     service by means of the court’s electronic-filing system is
               259     not effective if the filer learns that it did not reach the person
               260     to be served.

               261             New Rule 49(a)(3)(B) states that a court may provide
               262     by order or local rule that if a paper is filed under seal, it
               263     must be served by other means. This sentence is designed to
               264     account for districts in which parties in the case cannot
               265     access other participants’ sealed filings via the court’s
               266     electronic-filing system.

               267              Subdivision (a)(4). Rule 49(a)(4) is retitled “Service
               268     by Other Means” to reflect the relocation into that
               269     subdivision – as new Rule 49(a)(4)(E) – of what was
               270     previously Rule 49(a)(3)(B). The subdivision’s introductory
               271     phrase (“A paper may be served by”) is amended to read “A
               272     paper may also be served by.” This locution ensures that
               273     Rule 49(a)(4) remains an option for serving any litigant,
               274     even one who receives notices of case activity. This option
               275     might be useful to litigants who will be filing non-
               276     electronically but who wish to effect service on their
               277     opponents before the time when the court will have uploaded
               278     the filing into the court’s system (thus generating the notice
               279     of case activity).

               280             Subdivision (a)(4)(E) carries forward – for service by




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                               Page 171 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE                          15




               281     other electronic means –prior Rule 49(a)(3)(B)’s provision
               282     that such service is not effective if the sender “learns that it
               283     did not reach the person to be served”; a similar provision is
               284     carried forward in subdivision (a)(3)(A) with respect to
               285     service via the court’s electronic-filing system.

               286             Subdivision (a)(5). New Rule 49(a)(5) defines the
               287     term “notice of case activity” as any electronic notice
               288     provided to case participants through the court’s electronic-
               289     filing system to inform them of a filing or other activity on
               290     the docket. There are two equivalent terms currently in use:
               291     Notice of Electronic Filing and Notice of Docket Activity.
               292     “Notice of case activity” is intended to encompass both of
               293     those terms, as well as any equivalent terms that may come
               294     into use in future. The word “electronic” is deleted as
               295     superfluous now that electronic filing is the default method.

               296             Subdivision (b)(1). Subdivision (b)(1) previously
               297     provided that no certificate of service was required when a
               298     paper was served “by filing it with the court’s electronic-
               299     filing system.” This phrase is replaced by “through the
               300     court’s electronic-filing system under Rule 49(a)(3)” in
               301     order to conform to the change to subdivision (a)(3).

               302              Subdivision (b)(2). Amended Rule 49(b)(2) governs
               303     electronic filing and signing. New Rules 49(b)(2)(A) and (B)
               304     replace what had been Rule 49(b)(3). Under new Rule
               305     49(b)(2)(B)(i), the presumption is the opposite of the
               306     presumption set by the prior Rule 49(b)(3)(B). That is, under
               307     new Rule 49(b)(2)(B)(i), self-represented parties are
               308     presumptively authorized to use the court’s electronic-filing
               309     system to file documents in their case subsequent to the
               310     case’s commencement. If a district wishes to restrict self-
               311     represented parties’ access to the court’s electronic-filing
               312     system, it must adopt an order or local rule to impose that
               313     restriction. New Rule 49(b)(2)(B)(i) grants this presumptive




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                             Page 172 of 209
August 2026
                       16        FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE




               314     authorization to a self-represented ‘party,’ not to a self-
               315     represented ‘person.’ There is no change to Rule 49(c),
               316     which provides that nonparties may not use the court’s e-
               317     filing system unless allowed by court order or local rule.

               318             New Rule 49(b)(2)(B)(ii) states that the court may set
               319     reasonable conditions and restrictions on access by self-
               320     represented parties to the court’s electronic-filing system.
               321     For example, access to electronic filing could be allowed
               322     only to self-represented parties who are not incarcerated (in
               323     light of the distinctive logistical considerations that apply in
               324     carceral settings), who satisfactorily complete required
               325     training and/or certifications, and who comply with any
               326     other reasonable conditions on access.

               327             New Rule 49(b)(2)(B)(ii) expressly states that a
               328     reasonable restriction would include, where appropriate,
               329     orders barring a specific self-represented party from
               330     accessing the court’s electronic-filing system, or revoking a
               331     specific self-represented party’s access to the court’s
               332     electronic-filing system. Another example would be a local
               333     provision stating that certain types of filings – for example,
               334     notices of appeal – cannot be filed by means of the court’s
               335     electronic-filing system.

               336             However, new Rule 49(b)(2)(B)(ii) also expressly
               337     prohibits a court from barring all self-represented parties
               338     from using the court’s electronic-filing system, unless the
               339     court also either (1) includes reasonable exceptions to the
               340     prohibition, or (2) permits self-represented parties to use
               341     another electronic method for filing documents (such as by
               342     email or by upload through an electronic document
               343     submission system) and an alternative electronic means for
               344     receiving notice of court filings and orders (such as an
               345     electronic noticing program). For example, local provisions
               346     that require self-represented parties who seek to use the




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                             Page 173 of 209
August 2026
                       FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE                    17




               347     court’s electronic-filing system to obtain the court’s
               348     permission would count as including reasonable exceptions,
               349     so long as such permission is granted or withheld in
               350     accordance with the reasonable conditions and restrictions
               351     on access set by the court.

               352            Subdivision (b)(3). What had been Rule 49(b)(2)(B)
               353     (concerning nonelectronic means of filing) is carried
               354     forward as new Rule 49(b)(3).




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                       Page 174 of 209
August 2026
                         PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE FEDERAL
                            RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE1


                  1    Rule 49.1.      Privacy Protection For Filings Made with
                  2                    the Court

                  3    (a)     Redacted Filings. Unless the court orders otherwise,

                  4            in a party or nonparty making an electronic or paper

                  5            filing with the court that contains an individual’s

                  6            social-security     number,      taxpayer-identification

                  7            number, or birth date, the name of an individual

                  8            known to be a minor, a financial-account number, or

                  9            the home address of an individual, a party or

                10             nonparty making the filing may include only;,

                11             including any exhibit or attachment, must:

                12             (1)     the last four digits of the omit or completely

                13                     redact all social-security number and or other

                14                     taxpayer-identification numbers, including

                15                     employer-identification numbers; and


                               1
                                  New material is underlined in red; matter to be omitted
                       is lined through.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                               Page 175 of 209
August 2026
                       2     FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE




                16            (2)     if any of the following types of information

                17                    appear in the filing, include only:

                18                    (A)       the year of the an individual’s birth;

                19                    (3) (B) the minor’s initials a pseudonym in

                20                              place of the name of an individual

                21                              known to be a minor;

                22                    (4) (C) the last four digits of the a financial-

                23                              account number; and

                24                    (5) (D) the city and state of the an

                25                              individual’s home address.

                26     (b)    Exemptions from the Redaction Requirement.

                27            The redaction requirement does not apply to the

                28            following:

                29            (1)     a financial-account number or real property

                30                    address that identifies the property allegedly

                31                    subject    to   forfeiture   in   a    forfeiture

                32                    proceeding;

                33            (2)     the record of an administrative or agency




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                             Page 176 of 209
August 2026
                       3      FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE




                34                    proceeding;

                35            (3)     the   official   record    of    a   state-court

                36                    proceeding;

                37            (4)     the record of a court or tribunal, if that record

                38                    was not subject to the redaction requirement

                39                    when originally filed;

                40            (5)     a filing covered by Rule 49.1(d);

                41            (6)     a pro se filing in an action brought under 28

                42                    U.S.C. §§ 2241, 2254, or 2255;

                43            (7)     a court filing that is related to a criminal

                44                    matter or investigation and that is prepared

                45                    before the filing of a criminal charge or is not

                46                    filed as part of any docketed criminal case;

                47            (8)     an arrest or search warrant; and

                48            (9)     a charging document and an affidavit filed in

                49                    support of any charging document.

                50     (c)    Immigration Cases. A filing in an action brought




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                             Page 177 of 209
August 2026
                       4     FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE




                51            under 28 U.S.C. § 2241 that relates to the petitioner’s

                52            immigration rights is governed by Federal Rule of

                53            Civil Procedure 5.2.

                54     (d)    Filings Made Under Seal. The court may order that

                55            a filing be made under seal without redaction. The

                56            court may later unseal the filing or order the person

                57            who made the filing to file a redacted version for the

                58            public record.

                59     (e)    Protective Orders. For good cause, the court may by

                60            order in a case:

                61            (1)     require redaction of additional information;

                62                    or

                63            (2)     limit or prohibit a nonparty’s remote

                64                    electronic access to a document filed with the

                65                    court.

                66     (f)    Option for Additional Unredacted Filing Under

                67            Seal. A person making a redacted filing may also file




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                           Page 178 of 209
August 2026
                       5      FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE




                68            an unredacted copy under seal. The court must retain

                69            the unredacted copy as part of the record.

                70     (g)    Option for Filing a Reference List. A filing that

                71            contains redacted information may be filed together

                72            with a reference list that identifies each item of

                73            redacted information and specifies an appropriate

                74            identifier that uniquely corresponds to each item

                75            listed. The list must be filed under seal and may be

                76            amended as of right. Any reference in the case to a

                77            listed identifier will be construed to refer to the

                78            corresponding item of information.

                79     (h)    Waiver of Protection of Identifiers. A person

                80            waives the protection of Rule 49.1(a) as to the

                81            person’s own information by filing it without

                82            redaction and not under seal.

                83                          Committee Note

                84             In contrast to the current rule, which allows public
                85     filings to contain the last four digits of social-security and
                86     taxpayer-identification numbers, the amendment requires




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                           Page 179 of 209
August 2026
                       6     FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE




                87     the omission or redaction of all digits of social-security and
                88     taxpayer-identification numbers in public filings. Recent
                89     federal policy guidance recommends avoiding the
                90     unnecessary display of any part of these numbers on forms,
                91     reports, and computers. The Committee concluded that even
                92     partial numbers are useful to identity thieves, and that the
                93     omission of these numbers from public filings will impose
                94     no hardship on either litigants or the courts. In cases in which
                95     this information is pertinent, Rule 49.1(f) allows a party to
                96     file an unredacted copy of a filing under seal.

                97             Taxpayer-identification numbers (TINs) are
                98     identification numbers used in the administration of tax
                99     laws. In addition to Social Security numbers, TINs include
               100     individual taxpayer-identification numbers (ITINs),
               101     taxpayer-identification numbers for pending U.S. Adoptions
               102     (ATINs), and employer-identification numbers (EINs).

               103             The amendment’s protection for “taxpayer-
               104     identification numbers” includes employer-identification
               105     numbers as well as individual taxpayer-identification
               106     numbers and adoption-identification numbers. Although
               107     employer-identification numbers for some corporations may
               108     be publicly available, smaller businesses and individuals
               109     who employ others have a privacy interest in these numbers,
               110     and there is also a potential for their misuse.

               111             To enhance the protection of minors’ privacy and
               112     safety, the amendment also requires the substitution of a
               113     pseudonym, rather than initials, in place of a minor’s name
               114     in public filings. When it is feasible to do so, the use of
               115     gender-neutral pseudonyms is preferable. The use of
               116     gendered pseudonyms or pronouns, combined with other
               117     information contained in public pleadings, may make it
               118     easier to uncover the identity of a minor.

               119            The requirement for omission or redaction applies to




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                             Page 180 of 209
August 2026
                       7      FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE




               120     exhibits or attachments. Parties and nonparties who include
               121     exhibits or attachments in public filings are required to
               122     review them to ensure that they do not contain information
               123     protected by the rule. But the exemptions in subsection (b)
               124     still apply to exhibits and attachments (though a protective
               125     order under subsection (e) may require additional omission
               126     or redaction).




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                         Page 181 of 209
August 2026
                          FEDERAL RULES OF EVIDENCE




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules   Page 182 of 209
August 2026
           Excerpt from the May 17, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Evidence Rules


                        COMMITTEE ON RULES OF PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
                                                    OF THE
                            JUDICIAL CONFERENCE OF THE UNITED STATES
                                      WASHINGTON, D.C. 20544

JAMES C. DEVER III                                                           CHAIRS OF ADVISORY COMMITTEES
     CHAIR
                                                                                     ALLISON H. EID
CAROLYN A. DUBAY                                                                    APPELLATE RULES
   SECRETARY
                                                                                  REBECCA B. CONNELLY
                                                                                   BANKRUPTCY RULES

                                                                                     SARAH S. VANCE
                                                                                       CIVIL RULES

                                                                                  MICHAEL W. MOSMAN
                                                                                    CRIMINAL RULES

                                                                                    JESSE M. FURMAN
                                                                                     EVIDENCE RULES



                                           MEMORANDUM

    TO:              Hon. James C. Dever III, Chair
                     Committee on Rules of Practice and Procedure

    FROM:            Hon. Jesse M. Furman, Chair
                     Advisory Committee on Evidence Rules

    RE:              Report of the Advisory Committee on Evidence Rules

    DATE:       May 17, 2026
    _____________________________________________________________________________

    I.      Introduction
          The Advisory Committee on Evidence Rules (the “Committee”) met on May 7, 2026, in
    Washington, D.C. * * *

           The Committee now recommends * * * proposed amendments to Rule 902(1) and Rule
    104(a) and (b) for public comment. * * *

                                                 *****
    II.     Action Items

                                                 *****




    Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                  Page 183 of 209
    August 2026
       Excerpt from the May 17, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Evidence Rules


       B.      Proposed Amendment to Rule 902(1) – for Publication

        Before its Fall 2024 meeting, Judge Gregory K. Frizzell of the Northern District of
Oklahoma suggested that the Committee consider adding federally recognized Indian tribes to
Rule 902(1)(A), which provides that domestic public records that are sealed and signed are self-
authenticating. Because Rule 902(1)(A) does not list Indian tribes, the government must use
another route to authenticate proof of a defendant’s (or a victim’s) Indian status in federal
prosecutions brought for crimes occurring in Indian country. There have been some recent cases
in which the prosecution failed to prove Indian status by attempting, unsuccessfully, to meet the
requirements of the business records exception to the hearsay rule, with authentication by
certificate under Rule 902(11). The issue has arguably taken on more importance in light of the
increase in relevant federal cases following the Supreme Court’s decision in McGirt v. Oklahoma,
591 U.S. 894 (2020).

        The Committee sought and received input from Indian Tribes and Nations, as well as from
the Federal Defenders. The Tribes and Nations that did weigh in strongly supported the change,
on the ground that it would recognize the dignity and sovereignty of Indian tribes and Nations and
would avoid the burden and expense of tribal officials traveling long distances to qualify tribal
records. The Federal Defender’s position is that it is relatively simple to qualify a tribal record
through a certification under Rule 902(11) (meaning that the failures of proof in the recent cases
were attributable to the Department of Justice, not to the rules), that recordkeeping among Indian
tribes may not be uniform, and that generally Indian Tribes do not allow open access to their
records to non-members of the Tribe.

       After discussion, the Committee determined that it would be appropriate to add Indian
Tribes and Nations to the list of entities in Rule 902(1)(A) whose public records are self-
authenticating. The Committee ultimately saw no reason to differentiate the Tribes and Nations
from the many other government entities whose records are currently self-authenticating.

       At its meeting, the Committee voted, by a margin of 8-1, to recommend approval of the
proposal to amend Rule 902(1) for publication. The sole dissent was the Federal Defender
representative on the Committee. The Committee therefore recommends that the proposed
amendment to Rule 902(1)(A) and the accompanying Committee Note * * * be released for
public comment.

       C.      Proposed Amendments to Rule 104 — for Publication

        Rule 104(a) makes the important point that, in deciding preliminary issues of fact, the trial
judge is ordinarily not bound by the rules of admissibility. But one failing of Rule 104(a) is that it
does not specify the standard of proof required for the court to find that evidence is admissible.

        In Bourjaily v. United States, 483 U.S. 171, 175 (1987), the Supreme Court held that the
standard of proof for determinations of preliminary fact under Rule 104(a) is a preponderance of
the evidence. But not having that standard in text has raised problems, some of which led to the
amendment of Rule 702 in 2023 to set forth the preponderance standard in text (because many
courts and litigants had been treating the admissibility requirements of the Rule as questions of



Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                         Page 184 of 209
August 2026
       Excerpt from the May 17, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Evidence Rules


weight rather than admissibility under Rule 104(a)). After the Rule 2023 amendment to Rule 702,
some have argued that every subsequent amendment to the Evidence Rules will have to set forth
the preponderance standard in text to avoid ambiguity.

        By contrast, Rule 104(b) does set forth a standard of proof, one less stringent than Rule
104(a): evidence sufficient to support a finding. Per the Rule, that standard purportedly applies
only to questions of “conditional relevance” — i.e., when the probative value of one piece of
proffered evidence depends on the existence of another. (For example, when a statement is offered
to prove someone’s state of mind, it is conditioned on that person having heard it.) In Huddleston
v. United States, 485 U.S. 681, 687 (1988), the Supreme Court held that Rule 104(b) requires a
court to find only whether the finder of fact could reasonably find a fact by a preponderance of the
evidence. But the problem with Rule 104(b) is that the standard covers only so-called “conditional”
relevance, as distinct from all other questions of relevance (which some have called “logical”
relevance). This leaves the standard of proof for other relevance questions undetermined. What’s
more, “conditional” relevance is a confusing concept, because it fails to recognize that all questions
of relevance involve some condition. See, e.g., Ron Allen. The Myth of Conditional Relevance, 25
Loyola L. Rev. 871, 879 (1992).

        The Committee reviewed the case law on Rule 104(b) and found that there is some
confusion about its application. Some courts have mistaken admissibility requirements (supposed
to be covered by Rule 104(a)) as “conditions” and thus covered by the less demanding
requirements of Rule 104(b). Some litigants have argued that the court must make a finding of
“conditional” relevance when the proffered evidence is clearly relevant. Some courts have applied
Rule 104(a) to issues that are really questions of trial sequencing rather than conditional relevance.
Moreover, even where cases get it right, there is often a substantial waste of resources litigating
“conditions” that are virtually pointless to litigate. Relevancy questions should be quite
straightforward determinations of reasonableness that do not require briefing and hearings.

        After discussion, the Committee unanimously approved amendments to both Rule 104(a)
and (b) for release for public comment. The amendment to Rule 104(a) is straightforward. It simply
adds a sentence to the Rule:

                                              *****

       The proposed amendment to Rule 104(b) would eliminate the unhelpful concept of
“conditional” relevance and provide that the standard of proof for all questions of relevance is
whether a jury could reasonably find that the evidence has a tendency to make a fact of
consequence more or less probable than without the evidence:

                                              *****

     Beyond eliminating the confusing concept of “conditional” relevance, the proposed
amendment to Rule 104(b) makes two further improvements:

   •   It sets forth a standard of proof for all relevant evidence, which was a question not
       specifically covered in the original Rule, meaning technically the question of “logical”




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                         Page 185 of 209
August 2026
       Excerpt from the May 17, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Evidence Rules


       relevance was covered by Rule 104(a) — thus creating the anomaly that questions of
       “conditional” relevance were subject to a lesser standard of proof than questions of
       “logical” relevance.

   •   It eliminates the confusing and problematic phrase “proof sufficient to support a finding.”
       The fact is that questions of relevance may be determined without “proof” as they might
       be simple questions of logic and experience.

       At its meeting, the Committee unanimously voted to recommend the proposal to amend
Rule 104(a) and (b) for publication. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the proposed
amendments to Rule 104, and the accompanying Committee Note * * * be released for public
comment.

                                             *****




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                     Page 186 of 209
August 2026
                                  PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE
                                   FEDERAL RULES OF EVIDENCE1


                  1    Rule 902.         Evidence That Is Self-Authenticating

                  2                                 *****

                  3              (1)     Domestic Public Documents That Are

                  4                      Sealed and Signed. A document that bears:

                  5                      (A)     a seal purporting to be that of the

                  6                              United States; any state, district,

                  7                              commonwealth, territory, or insular

                  8                              possession of the United States; a

                  9                              federally recognized Indian Tribe or

                10                               Nation; the former Panama Canal

                11                               Zone; the Trust Territory of the

                12                               Pacific Islands; a political subdivision

                13                               of any of these entities; or a

                14                               department, agency, or officer of any

                15                               entity named above; and


                            1
                                New material is underlined in red.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                               Page 187 of 209
August 2026
                          2           FEDERAL RULES OF EVIDENCE




                16                    (B)     a signature purporting to be an

                17                            execution or attestation.

                18                               *****

                19                          Committee Note

                20          The rule has been amended to provide that a sealed and
                21      signed document from a federally recognized Indian Tribe
                22      or Nation is entitled to the same presumption of
                23      authenticity as a comparable document from the
                24      government entities currently listed in Rule 902(1)(A).
                25      The amendment thus recognizes the sovereignty of Indian
                26      Tribes and Nations. Furthermore, self-authentication of the
                27      public documents of Indian Tribes and Nations will allow
                28      for more efficient proof of tribal records in federal court
                29      and will conserve the valuable resources of tribal officials
                30      who often had to appear in court to authenticate documents
                31      prior to the amendment.

                32         Under the Federally Recognized Indian Tribe List Act
                33      of 1994 (P.L. 103-454), the Secretary of the Interior
                34      publishes a list of all federally recognized Indian tribes in
                35      the Federal Register, through which courts may identify
                36      covered Tribes and Nations. The amendment permits self-
                37      authentication of the qualifying sealed and signed
                38      documents of any Indian Tribe or Nation that is federally
                39      recognized as of the date that the document is offered into
                40      evidence.

                41         The amendment concerns authenticity only; other
                42      evidentiary requirements continue to apply. As with other
                43      902(1) documents, parties may still challenge the
                44      authenticity of the covered public documents at trial.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                           Page 188 of 209
August 2026
                                  PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE
                                   FEDERAL RULES OF EVIDENCE1


                  1    Rule 104.         Preliminary Questions

                  2    (a)       In General. The court must decide any preliminary

                  3              question about whether a witness is qualified, a

                  4              privilege exists, or evidence is admissible. In so

                  5              deciding, the court is not bound by evidence rules,

                  6              except those on privilege. Unless these rules provide

                  7              otherwise, the proponent must establish the existence

                  8              of a preliminary fact by a preponderance of the

                  9              evidence.

                10     (b)       Relevance That Depends on a Fact. When the

                11               relevance of evidence depends on whether a fact

                12               exists, proof must be introduced sufficient to support

                13               a finding that the fact does exist. To establish that

                14               evidence is relevant, the proponent must demonstrate



                             1
                               New material is underlined in red; matter to be omitted is
                       lined through.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                               Page 189 of 209
August 2026
                       2               FEDERAL RULES OF EVIDENCE




                15             to the court that the trier of fact could reasonably find

                16             that the requirements of Rule 401 have been met. In

                17             making its relevance determination, the court may

                18             consider the evidence itself, other evidence, and

                19             common knowledge and experience. The court may

                20             admit the proposed evidence on the condition that the

                21             further proof be introduced later.

                22                                *****
                23                            Committee Note

                24             Two changes are made to Rule 104. First, the
                25     amendment codifies the holding in Bourjaily v. United
                26     States, 483 U.S. 171, 175 (1987), that preliminary questions
                27     of fact under Rule 104(a) are to be determined by a
                28     preponderance of the evidence. The Committee has
                29     determined that codification would be useful because there
                30     has been some confusion about the applicable standard of
                31     proof for preliminary questions. See the 2023 amendment to
                32     Rule 702.

                33            Some situations call for a lower standard of proof for
                34     a preliminary question, ordinarily because on those
                35     questions, the jury is in as good a position as the court to
                36     determine the contested fact, and there is little to no risk that
                37     the jury will be misled or subject to unfair prejudice in
                38     making the determination. See Rules 104(b), 602, 901 and
                39     1008.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                              Page 190 of 209
August 2026
                              FEDERAL RULES OF EVIDENCE                             3




                40             Second, the amendment to Rule 104(b) eliminates
                41     the concept of “conditional relevance.” There is no reason
                42     for special treatment of facts that are conditionally relevant,
                43     because in almost all cases, the relevance of a particular fact
                44     is dependent on a showing of other facts and so the relevance
                45     is “conditional.” Moreover, if the existence of one fact is
                46     conditionally relevant upon another, the result is that both
                47     facts are “conditionally relevant.” See Ronald Allen, The
                48     Myth of Conditional Relevance, 25 Loyola L. Rev. 871-884,
                49     879 (1992) (“Evidence is relevant only because there is an
                50     intermediate premise or set of premises that connects the
                51     evidence to some proposition involved in the litigation. But
                52     if determining the relevance of evidence always requires
                53     relying on some intermediate premise, no distinction can be
                54     drawn between relevancy and conditional relevancy.”).
                55     Providing a uniform approach to all questions of relevance
                56     avoids confusion, especially because most courts currently
                57     use the same permissive approach to all relevant evidence,
                58     conditional or not. All questions of relevance should be
                59     governed by the same “a reasonable person could find”
                60     standard because the jury is in as good a position to
                61     determine relevance as is the court.

                62              The rule 104(b) test that “proof must be introduced
                63     sufficient to support a finding” has been revised, because a
                64     court’s preliminary determination of relevance is not limited
                65     to proof submitted to it. A court could find evidence relevant
                66     under Rule 104(b) by considering the evidence itself, as well
                67     as common knowledge and experience. For example, if the
                68     proffered evidence is that the defendant was carrying a gun,
                69     its relevance to a charge of armed robbery can be determined
                70     without any further proof. The standard has been changed to
                71     whether the factfinder “could reasonably find” the evidence
                72     to be relevant. That standard is the same as “sufficient to
                73     support a finding.” See Huddleston v. United States, 485
                74     U.S. 681, 687 (1988) (in determining whether the proponent




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                            Page 191 of 209
August 2026
                       4               FEDERAL RULES OF EVIDENCE




                75     has introduced sufficient evidence to meet Rule 104(b), the
                76     trial court decides whether “the jury could reasonably find”
                77     the contested fact).

                78              In deciding whether evidence is relevant, the judge
                79     must not only take into account the evidence formally in the
                80     record, but also the likely background knowledge and
                81     experience of a reasonable juror from the area where trial is
                82     being held. For example, suppose a trial concerns the cause
                83     of a large explosion and fire. The plaintiff claims that the
                84     defendant mishandled nitrogen fertilizer containing
                85     ammonium nitrate. A witness is asked whether such a
                86     fertilizer was stored on the premises and an objection on
                87     relevance is made. If the trial is in a rural state with a large
                88     farming population, the trial judge would likely overrule the
                89     objection because a reasonable person from that population
                90     would likely know the dangerous properties of the material.
                91     If, by contrast, the trial were held in an urban area, the judge
                92     would likely conclude that evidence of the dangerous
                93     properties must be entered into the record to satisfy the
                94     requirement of relevance.

                95             The amendment retains the provision allowing proof
                96     to be introduced later. It should be noted that allowing proof
                97     to be introduced later is within the discretion of the court
                98     under Rule 104(a) as well.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                             Page 192 of 209
August 2026
                                          APPENDIX




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules   Page 193 of 209
August 2026
                                     Guide to Judiciary Policy
                                      Volume 1, Chapter 4

§ 440 Procedures for Committees on Rules of Practice and Procedure
This section contains the "Procedures for the Judicial Conference's Committee on Rules of
Practice and Procedure and Its Advisory Rules Committees," last amended in September
2011. JCUS-SEP 2011, p. 35.
§ 440.10 Overview
The Rules Enabling Act, 28 U.S.C. §§ 2071–2077, authorizes the Supreme Court to prescribe
general rules of practice and procedure and rules of evidence for the federal courts. Under the
Act, the Judicial Conference must appoint a standing committee, and may appoint advisory
committees to recommend new and amended rules. Section 2073 requires the Judicial
Conference to publish the procedures that govern the work of the Committee on Rules of
Practice and Procedure (the "Standing Committee") and its advisory committees on the Rules of
Appellate, Bankruptcy, Civil, and Criminal Procedure and on the Evidence Rules. See 28 U.S.C.
§ 2073(a)(1). These procedures do not limit the rules committees' authority. Failure to comply
with them does not invalidate any rules committee action. Cf. 28 U.S.C. § 2073(e).
§ 440.20 Advisory Committees
§ 440.20.10 Functions
Each advisory committee must engage in "a continuous study of the operation and effect of the
general rules of practice and procedure now or hereafter in use" in its field, taking into
consideration suggestions and recommendations received from any source, new statutes and
court decisions affecting the rules, and legal commentary. See 28 U.S.C. § 331.
§ 440.20.20 Suggestions and Recommendations
Suggestions and recommendations on the rules are submitted to the Secretary of the Standing
Committee at the Administrative Office of the United States Courts, Washington, D.C. The
Secretary will acknowledge the suggestions or recommendations and refer them to the
appropriate advisory committee. If the Standing Committee takes formal action on them, that
action will be reflected in the Standing Committee's minutes, which are posted on the judiciary's
rulemaking website.
§ 440.20.30 Drafting Rule Changes
   (a) Meetings
Each advisory committee meets at the times and places that the chair designates. Advisory
committee meetings must be open to the public, except when the committee — in open session
and with a majority present — determines that it is in the public interest to have all or part of the
meeting closed and states the reason. Each meeting must be preceded by notice of the time
and place, published in the Federal Register and on the judiciary's rulemaking website,
sufficiently in advance to permit interested persons to attend.
   (b) Preparing Draft Changes
The reporter assigned to each advisory committee should prepare for the committee, under the
direction of the committee or its chair, draft rule changes, committee notes explaining their




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                         Page 194 of 209
August 2026
                                     Guide to Judiciary Policy
                                      Volume 1, Chapter 4

purpose, and copies or summaries of written recommendations and suggestions received by the
committee.
   (c) Considering Draft Changes
The advisory committee studies the rules' operation and effect. It meets to consider proposed
new and amended rules (together with committee notes), whether changes should be made,
and whether they should be submitted to the Standing Committee with a recommendation to
approve for publication. The submission must be accompanied by a written report explaining the
advisory committee's action and its evaluation of competing considerations.
§ 440.20.40 Publication and Public Hearings
   (a) Publication
Before any proposed rule change is published, the Standing Committee must approve
publication. The Secretary then arranges for printing and circulating the proposed change to the
bench, bar, and public. Publication should be as wide as possible. The proposed change must
be published in the Federal Register and on the judiciary's rulemaking website. The Secretary
must:
           (1) notify members of Congress, federal judges, and the chief justice of each state's
               highest court of the proposed change, with a link to the judiciary's rulemaking
               website; and
           (2) provide copies of the proposed change to legal-publishing firms with a request to
               timely include it in publications.
   (b) Public Comment Period
A public comment period on the proposed change must extend for at least six months after
notice is published in the Federal Register, unless a shorter period is approved under paragraph
(d) of this section.
   (c) Hearings
The advisory committee must conduct public hearings on the proposed change unless
eliminating them is approved under paragraph (d) of this section or not enough witnesses ask to
testify at a particular hearing. The hearings are held at the times and places that the advisory
committee's chair determines. Notice of the times and places must be published in the Federal
Register and on the judiciary's rulemaking website. The hearings must be transcribed.
Whenever possible, a transcript should be produced by a qualified court reporter.
   (d) Expedited Procedures
The Standing Committee may shorten the public comment period or eliminate public hearings if
it determines that the administration of justice requires a proposed rule change to be expedited
and that appropriate notice to the public can still be provided and public comment obtained. The
Standing Committee may also eliminate public notice and comment for a technical or
conforming amendment if the Committee determines that they are unnecessary. When an
exception is made, the chair must advise the Judicial Conference and provide the reasons.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                     Page 195 of 209
August 2026
                                     Guide to Judiciary Policy
                                      Volume 1, Chapter 4

§ 440.20.50 Procedures After the Comment Period
   (a) Summary of Comments
When the public comment period ends, the reporter must prepare a summary of the written
comments received and of the testimony presented at public hearings. If the number of
comments is very large, the reporter may summarize and aggregate similar individual
comments, identifying the source of each one.
   (b) Advisory Committee Review; Republication
The advisory committee reviews the proposed change in light of any comments and testimony.
If the advisory committee makes substantial changes, the proposed rule should be republished
for an additional period of public comment unless the advisory committee determines that
republication would not be necessary to achieve adequate public comment and would not assist
the work of the rules committees.
   (c) Submission to the Standing Committee
The advisory committee submits to the Standing Committee the proposed change and
committee note that it recommends for approval. Each submission must:
           (1) be accompanied by a separate report of the comments received;
           (2) explain the changes made after the original publication; and
           (3) include an explanation of competing considerations examined by the advisory
               committee.
§ 440.20.60 Preparing Minutes and Maintaining Records
   (a) Minutes of Meetings
The advisory committee's chair arranges for preparing the minutes of the committee meetings.
   (b) Records
The advisory committee's records consist of:
              written suggestions received from the public;
              written comments received from the public on drafts of proposed rules;
              the committee's responses to public suggestions and comments;
              other correspondence with the public about proposed rule changes;
              electronic recordings and transcripts of public hearings (when prepared);
              the reporter's summaries of public comments and of testimony from public
               hearings;
              agenda books and materials prepared for committee meetings;
              minutes of committee meetings;
              approved drafts of rule changes; and
              reports to the Standing Committee.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                   Page 196 of 209
August 2026
                                     Guide to Judiciary Policy
                                      Volume 1, Chapter 4

   (c) Public Access to Records
The records must be posted on the judiciary's rulemaking website, except for general public
correspondence about proposed rule changes and electronic recordings of hearings when
transcripts are prepared. This correspondence and archived records are maintained by the AO
and are available for public inspection. Minutes of a closed meeting may be made available to
the public but with any deletions necessary to avoid frustrating the purpose of closing the
meeting under § 440.20.30(a).
§ 440.30 Standing Committee
§ 440.30.10 Functions
The Standing Committee's functions include:
   (a) coordinating the work of the advisory committees;
   (b) suggesting proposals for them to study;
   (c) considering proposals they recommend for publication for public comment; and
   (d) for proposed rule changes that have completed that process, deciding whether to accept
       or modify the proposals and transmit them with its own recommendation to the Judicial
       Conference, recommit them to the advisory committee for further study and
       consideration, or reject them.
§ 440.30.20 Procedures
   (a) Meetings
The Standing Committee meets at the times and places that the chair designates. Committee
meetings must be open to the public, except when the Committee — in open session and with a
majority present — determines that it is in the public interest to have all or part of the meeting
closed and states the reason. Each meeting must be preceded by notice of the time and place,
published in the Federal Register and on the judiciary's rulemaking website, sufficiently in
advance to permit interested persons to attend.
   (b) Attendance by the Advisory Committee Chairs and Reporters
The advisory committees' chairs and reporters should attend the Standing Committee meetings
to present their committees' proposed rule changes and committee notes, to inform the
Standing Committee about ongoing work, and to participate in the discussions.
   (c) Action on Proposed Rule Changes or Committee Notes
The Standing Committee may accept, reject, or modify a proposed change or committee note,
or may return the proposal to the advisory committee with instructions or recommendations.
   (d) Transmission to the Judicial Conference
The Standing Committee must transmit to the Judicial Conference the proposed rule changes
and committee notes that it approves, together with the advisory committee report. The
Standing Committee's report includes its own recommendations and explains any changes that
it made.




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                      Page 197 of 209
August 2026
                                     Guide to Judiciary Policy
                                      Volume 1, Chapter 4

§ 440.30.30 Preparing Minutes and Maintaining Records
   (a) Minutes of Meetings
The Secretary prepares minutes of Standing Committee meetings.
   (b) Records
The Standing Committee's records consist of:
              the minutes of Standing Committee and advisory committee meetings;
              agenda books and materials prepared for Standing Committee meetings;
              reports to the Judicial Conference; and
              official correspondence about rule changes, including correspondence with
               advisory committee chairs.

   (c) Public Access to Records
The records must be posted on the judiciary's rulemaking website, except for official
correspondence about rule changes. This correspondence and archived records are maintained
by the AO and are available for public inspection. Minutes of a closed meeting may be made
available to the public but with any deletions necessary to avoid frustrating the purpose of
closing the meeting under § 440.30.20(a).




Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                   Page 198 of 209
August 2026
                                       Committee Rosters
              COMMITTEE ON RULES OF PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
                            (Standing Committee)

                     Chair                                          Reporter

  Honorable James C. Dever III                    Professor Edward Hartnett
  United States District Court                    Seton Hall University School of Law
  Raleigh, NC                                     Newark, NJ

                                             Members

  Honorable Paul J. Barbadoro                     Todd Blanche, Esq.
  United States District Court                    Deputy Attorney General (ex officio)
  Concord, NH                                     United States Department of Justice
                                                  Washington, DC

  Elizabeth J. Cabraser, Esq.                     Louis A. Chaiten, Esq.
  Lieff Cabraser Heimann & Bernstein, LLP         Jones Day
  San Francisco, CA                               Cleveland, OH

  Honorable Colm F. Connolly                      Honorable Joan N. Ericksen
  United States District Court                    United States District Court
  Wilmington, DE                                  Minneapolis, MN

  Honorable Stephen A. Higginson                  Honorable Edward M. Mansfield
  United States Court of Appeals                  Iowa Supreme Court
  New Orleans, LA                                 Des Moines, IA

  Dean Troy A. McKenzie                           Andrew J. Pincus, Esq.
  New York University School of Law               Mayer Brown LLP
  New York, NY                                    Washington, DC

  Honorable Allison J. Rushing                    Hon. Amul R. Thapar
  United States Court of Appeals                  United States Court of Appeals
  Asheville, NC                                   Covington, KY

  Bart H. Williams, Esq.
  Proskauer Rose LLP
  Los Angeles, CA

                                           Consultants

  Professor Daniel R. Coquillette                 Professor Bryan A. Garner
  Boston College Law School                       LawProse, Inc.
  Newton Centre, MA                               Dallas, TX

  Professor Joseph Kimble                         Professor Catherine T. Struve
  Thomas M. Cooley Law School                     University of Pennsylvania Law School
  Lansing, MI                                     Philadelphia, PA


Effective: June 1, 2026 to September 30, 2026                                               Page 2
Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                      Page 199 of 209
August 2026
                                       Committee Rosters
              COMMITTEE ON RULES OF PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
                            (Standing Committee)

                              Secretary to the Standing Committee

  Carolyn A. Dubay, Esq.
  Chief Counsel
  Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts
  Office of the General Counsel – Rules Committee Staff
  Washington, DC




Effective: June 1, 2026 to September 30, 2026                                Page 3
Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules       Page 200 of 209
August 2026
                                        Committee Rosters
                   ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON APPELLATE RULES


                     Chair                                          Reporter

  Honorable Allison H. Eid                        Professor Stephen Sachs
  United States Court of Appeals                  Harvard Law School
  Denver, CO                                      Cambridge, MA

                                             Members

  Andrew L. Adler, Esq.                           Linda Coberly, Esq.
  Office of the Federal Public Defender           Winston & Strawn LLP
  Fort Lauderdale, FL                             Chicago, IL

  George W. Hicks, Jr., Esq.                      Professor Bert Huang
  Kirkland & Ellis LLP                            Columbia Law School
  Washington, DC                                  New York, NY

  Honorable Leondra R. Kruger                     Honorable Carl J. Nichols
  Supreme Court of California                     United States District Court
  San Francisco, CA                               Washington, DC

  D. John Sauer, Esq.                             Honorable Sidney R. Thomas
  Solicitor General (ex officio)                  United States Court of Appeals
  United States Department of Justice             Billings, MT
  Washington, DC

  Honorable Richard C. Wesley
  United States Court of Appeals
  Geneseo, NY

                                             Liaisons

  Honorable Daniel A. Bress                       Andrew J. Pincus, Esq.
  (Bankruptcy)                                    (Standing)
  United States Court of Appeals                  Mayer Brown LLP
  San Francisco, CA                               Washington, DC

                                 Clerk of Court Representative

  Christopher Wolpert, Esq.
  Clerk
  United States Court of Appeals
  Denver, CO




Effective: June 1, 2026 to September 30, 2026                                               Page 1
Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                      Page 201 of 209
August 2026
                                       Committee Rosters
                  ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON BANKRUPTCY RULES


                     Chair                                          Reporter

  Honorable Rebecca B. Connelly                   Professor S. Elizabeth Gibson
  United States Bankruptcy Court                  University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
  Harrisonburg, VA                                Chapel Hill, NC

                                                                Associate Reporter

                                                  Professor Laura B. Bartell
                                                  Wayne State University Law School
                                                  Detroit, MI

                                             Members

  Alane A. Becket, Esq.                           Honorable Daniel A. Bress
  Becket & Lee LLP                                United States Court of Appeals
  Malvern, PA                                     San Francisco, CA

  Honorable James O. Browning                     Jenny L. Doling, Esq.
  United States District Court                    J. Doling Law PC
  Albuquerque, NM                                 Palm Desert, CA

  Honorable Michelle M. Harner                    Honorable Jeffery P. Hopkins
  United States Bankruptcy Court                  United States District Court
  Baltimore, MD                                   Cincinnati, OH

  Honorable Ben Kahn                              Honorable Joan H. Lefkow
  United States Bankruptcy Court                  United States District Court
  Greensboro, NC                                  Chicago, IL

  Honorable Leigh Martin May                      Honorable Catherine P. McEwen
  United States District Court                    United States Bankruptcy Court
  Atlanta, GA                                     Tampa, FL

  Professor Scott F. Norberg                      Diego Pestana, Esq.
  Florida International University                Office of the Deputy Attorney General (ex
  College of Law                                  officio)
  Miami, FL                                       United States Department of Justice
                                                  Washington, DC

  Damian S. Schaible, Esq.                        Nancy J. Whaley, Esq.
  Davis Polk & Wardwell LLP                       The Offices of Nancy J. Whaley
  New York, NY                                    Atlanta, GA




Effective: June 1, 2026 to September 30, 2026                                               Page 1
Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                      Page 202 of 209
August 2026
                                       Committee Rosters
                  ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON BANKRUPTCY RULES


                                             Liaisons

  Ramona D. Elliott, Esq.                         Honorable Deborah Lee Thorne
  (U.S. Trustees)                                 (Committee on the Administration of the
  Executive Office for U.S. Trustees              Bankruptcy System)
  Washington, DC                                  United States Bankruptcy Court
                                                  Chicago, IL

  Dean Troy A. McKenzie
  (Standing)
  New York University School of Law
  New York, NY

                                 Clerk of Court Representative

  Kenneth S. Gardner
  Clerk
  United States Bankruptcy Court
  Denver, CO




Effective: June 1, 2026 to September 30, 2026                                              Page 2
Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                     Page 203 of 209
August 2026
                                       Committee Rosters
                       ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON CIVIL RULES


                    Chair                                           Reporter

 Honorable Sarah S. Vance                        Professor Richard L. Marcus
 United States District Court                    University of California
 New Orleans, LA                                 College of the Law, San Francisco
                                                 San Francisco, CA

                                                                Associate Reporter

                                                 Professor Andrew Bradt
                                                 University of California, Berkeley
                                                 Berkeley, CA

                                            Members

Honorable Cathy Bissoon                          Honorable Jane Bland
United States District Court                     Supreme Court of Texas
Pittsburgh, PA                                   Austin, Texas

David J. Burman, Esq.                            Honorable Annie Christoff
Perkins Coie LLP                                 United States District Court
Seattle, WA                                      Memphis, TN

Professor Zachary Clopton                        Honorable David C. Godbey
Northwestern University                          United States District Court
Pritzker School of Law                           Dallas, TX
Chicago, IL

W. Mark Lanier, Esq.                             Jocelyn D. Larkin, Esq.
The Lanier Law Firm                              Impact Fund
Houston, TX                                      Berkeley, CA

Honorable M. Hannah Lauck                        Honorable R. David Proctor
United States District Court                     United States District Court
Richmond, VA                                     Birmingham, AL

Honorable Marvin Quattlebaum, Jr.                Honorable Manish S. Shah
United States Court of Appeals                   United States District Court
Greenville, SC                                   Chicago, IL

Brett A. Shumate, Esq.                           David C. Wright III, Esq.
Assistant Attorney General (ex officio)          Robinson, Bradshaw & Hinson, P.A.
United States Department of Justice              Charlotte, NC
Washington, DC




Effective: June 1, 2026 to September 30, 2026                                                  Page 1
Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                         Page 204 of 209
August 2026
                                       Committee Rosters
                       ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON CIVIL RULES


                                             Liaisons

Hon. Amul R. Thapar                               Honorable Catherine P. McEwen
(Standing)                                        (Bankruptcy)
United States Court of Appeals                    United States Bankruptcy Court
Covington, KY                                     Tampa, FL

                                           Consultant

 Professor Edward H. Cooper
 University of Michigan Law School
 Ann Arbor, MI

                                 Clerk of Court Representative

 Thomas G. Bruton
 Clerk
 United States District Court
 Chicago, IL




Effective: June 1, 2026 to September 30, 2026                                               Page 2
Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                      Page 205 of 209
August 2026
                                        Committee Rosters
                    ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON CRIMINAL RULES


                     Chair                                           Reporter

 Honorable Michael W. Mosman                       Professor Sara Sun Beale
 United States District Court                      Duke Law School
 Portland, OR                                      Durham, NC

                                                                Associate Reporter

                                                   Professor Nancy J. King
                                                   Vanderbilt University Law School
                                                   Nashville, TN

                                            Members

 Honorable André Birotte Jr.                       Honorable Jane Boyle
 United States District Court                      United States District Court
 Los Angeles, CA                                   Dallas, TX

 Honorable Timothy Burgess                         Honorable Thomas M. Durkin
 United States District Court                      United States District Court
 Anchorage, AK                                     Chicago, IL

 A. Tysen Duva, Esq.                               Honorable Michael Harvey
 Assistant Attorney General (ex officio)           United States District Court
 United States Department of Justice               Washington, DC
 Washington, DC

 Marianne Mariano, Esq.                            Shazzie Naseem, Esq.
 Office of the Federal Public Defender             Berkowitz Oliver LLP
 Buffalo, NY                                       Kansas City, MO

 Honorable Jacqueline H. Nguyen                    Honorable Carlos A. Samour, Jr.
 United States Court of Appeals                    Colorado Supreme Court
 Pasadena, CA                                      Denver, CO

 Professor Jenia Turner                            Mary Jo White, Esq.
 Southern Methodist University                     Debevoise & Plimpton LLP
 Dedman School of Law                              New York, NY
 Dallas, TX

                                                Liaison

 Honorable Paul J. Barbadoro
 (Standing)
 United States District Court
 Concord, NH


Effective: June 1, 2026 to September 30, 2026                                                 Page 1
Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                         Page 206 of 209
August 2026
                                       Committee Rosters
                    ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON CRIMINAL RULES


                                Clerk of Court Representative

 Brandy S. Lonchena, Esq.
 Clerk
 United States District Court
 Pittsburgh, PA




Effective: June 1, 2026 to September 30, 2026                            Page 2
Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules   Page 207 of 209
August 2026
                                       Committee Rosters
                    ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON EVIDENCE RULES


                     Chair                                          Reporter

  Honorable Jesse M. Furman                       Professor Daniel J. Capra
  United States District Court                    Fordham University School of Law
  New York, NY                                    New York, NY



                                             Members

  Honorable Valerie E. Caproni                    James P. Cooney III, Esq.
  United States District Court                    Womble Bond Dickinson LLP
  New York, NY                                    Charlotte, NC

  Honorable Mark S. Massa                         James McHenry, Esq.
  Indiana Supreme Court                           Acting Principal Associate Deputy Attorney
  Indianapolis, IN                                General (ex officio)
                                                  United States Department of Justice
                                                  Washington, DC

  Honorable Edmund A. Sargus, Jr.                 John S. Siffert, Esq.
  United States District Court                    Lankler Siffert & Wohl LLP
  Columbus, OH                                    New York, NY

  Honorable Richard J. Sullivan                   Rene L. Valladares, Esq.
  United States Court of Appeals                  Office of the Federal Public Defender
  New York, NY                                    Las Vegas, NV

                                            Consultant

  Professor Liesa Richter
  University of Oklahoma School of Law
  Norman, OK

                                             Liaisons

  Honorable Thomas M. Durkin                      Honorable Edward M. Mansfield
  (Criminal)                                      (Standing)
  United States District Court                    Iowa Supreme Court
  Chicago, IL                                     Des Moines, IA

  Honorable M. Hannah Lauck
  (Civil)
  United States District Court
  Richmond, VA




Effective: June 1, 2026 to September 30, 2026                                              Page 1
Preliminary Draft of Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules                     Page 208 of 209
August 2026
Committee on Rules of Practice and Procedure
  Judicial Conference of the United States
Thurgood Marshall Federal Judiciary Building
           Washington, DC 20544
               uscourts.gov
