                                                                                            Agenda E-19 (Summary)
                                                                                                            Rules
                                                                                                   September 2026

                                               SUMMARY OF THE

                            REPORT OF THE JUDICIAL CONFERENCE

               COMMITTEE ON RULES OF PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
      The Committee on Rules of Practice and Procedure recommends that the Judicial
Conference:

1.     Approve the proposed 2026 Report of the Judicial Conference of the United
       States on the Adequacy of Privacy Rules Prescribed Under the E-Government Act
       of 2002, as set forth in Appendix A, and ask the Administrative Office Director to
       transmit it to Congress in accordance with the law .........................................................p. 4

2.     Approve the proposed amendments to Appellate Rules 15, 29, and 32 and to the
       Appendix of Length Limits, as set forth in Appendix B, and transmit them to the
       Supreme Court for consideration with a recommendation that they be adopted by
       the Court and transmitted to Congress in accordance with the law ........................... pp. 5-8

3      a. Approve the proposed amendments to Bankruptcy Rule 2002, as set forth in
          Appendix C, and transmit them to the Supreme Court for consideration with a
          recommendation that they be adopted by the Court and transmitted to
          Congress in accordance with the law; and

       b. Approve, effective December 1, 2026, the proposed amendments to
          Bankruptcy Official Forms 101 and 106C, as set forth in Appendix C, for use
          in all bankruptcy proceedings commenced after the effective date and, insofar
          as just and practicable, all proceedings pending on the effective date .............. pp. 9-10

4.     Approve the proposed amendments to Civil Rules 7.1, 26, 41, 45, and 81, as set
       forth in Appendix D, and transmit them to the Supreme Court for consideration
       with a recommendation that they be adopted by the Court and transmitted to
       Congress in accordance with the law ..................................................................... pp. 13-15

5.     Approve the proposed amendments to Criminal Rule 17, as set forth in Appendix
       E, and transmit them to the Supreme Court for consideration with a
       recommendation that they be adopted by the Court and transmitted to Congress
       in accordance with the law ..................................................................................... pp. 18-19



                                                         NOTICE
     NO RECOMMENDATIONS PRESENTED HEREIN REPRESENT THE POLICY OF THE JUDICIAL CONFERENCE
                         UNLESS APPROVED BY THE CONFERENCE ITSELF.
(Rev. 8/27/26)

        The remainder of the report is submitted for the record and includes the following items
for the information of the Judicial Conference:

       E-Filing and Service by Self-Represented Litigants .................................................. pp. 2-3
       Privacy Rules for Taxpayer Information and Minors’ Names.........................................p. 3
       Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure ....................................................................... pp. 8-9
       Federal Rules of Bankruptcy Procedure ................................................................ pp. 10-13
       Federal Rules of Civil Procedure ........................................................................... pp. 16-18
       Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure..................................................................... pp. 20-22
       Federal Rules of Evidence ..................................................................................... pp. 23-26




Rules Summary - Page 2
                                                                                  Agenda E-19
                                                                                        Rules
                                                                               September 2026

                      REPORT OF THE JUDICIAL CONFERENCE

             COMMITTEE ON RULES OF PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE

TO THE CHIEF JUSTICE OF THE UNITED STATES AND MEMBERS OF THE
JUDICIAL CONFERENCE OF THE UNITED STATES:

       The Committee on Rules of Practice and Procedure (Standing Committee or Committee)

met on June 3-4, 2026. All members participated. Representing the advisory committees were

Judge Allison H. Eid (10th Cir.), chair, and Professor Stephen Sachs, Reporter, Advisory

Committee on Appellate Rules; Judge Rebecca Buehler Connelly (Bankr. W.D. Va.), chair,

Professor S. Elizabeth Gibson, Reporter, and Professor Laura B. Bartell, Associate Reporter,

Advisory Committee on Bankruptcy Rules; Judge Sarah S. Vance (E.D. La.), chair, Professor

Richard L. Marcus, Reporter, and Professor Andrew Bradt, Associate Reporter, Advisory

Committee on Civil Rules; Judge Michael W. Mosman (D. Or.), chair, Professor Sara Sun Beale,

Reporter, and Professor Nancy J. King, Associate Reporter, Advisory Committee on Criminal

Rules; and Judge Jesse M. Furman (S.D.N.Y.), chair, and Professor Daniel Capra, Reporter,

Advisory Committee on Evidence Rules.

       Also participating in the meeting were Professor Edward Hartnett, Standing Committee

Reporter; Professor Catherine T. Struve, Professor Daniel R. Coquillette, Professor Bryan A.

Garner, and Professor Joseph Kimble, consultants to the Standing Committee; Carolyn A.

Dubay, Secretary to the Standing Committee; Sarah Sraders, Rules Committee Staff Counsel;

Dr. Tim Reagan, Senior Research Associate, Federal Judicial Center (FJC); and Elizabeth J.




                                            NOTICE
     NO RECOMMENDATIONS PRESENTED HEREIN REPRESENT THE POLICY OF THE JUDICIAL CONFERENCE
                         UNLESS APPROVED BY THE CONFERENCE ITSELF.
Shapiro, Deputy Director, Federal Programs Branch, Civil Division, Department of Justice, on

behalf of the Deputy Attorney General.

         In addition to its general business and consideration of the Advisory Committee reports

and recommended action items as discussed below, the Committee also received an update on

the work of its subcommittee concerning uniform attorney admissions in the trial courts and

concluded that no further action on the project is warranted. The Committee further authorized

the Chair, working with the Secretary of the Committee, to respond to the request of the

Judiciary Planning Coordinator, Chief Judge Michael A. Chagares (3d. Cir.), to identify any

agenda items of the Rules Committees that align with the Executive Committee’s priority

strategies and goals in the Strategic Plan for the Federal Judiciary. The Committee’s views

were communicated to Chief Judge Michael A. Chagares, the judiciary planning coordinator, by

letter dated June 11, 2026.

                 E-FILING AND SERVICE BY SELF-REPRESENTED LITIGANTS

         The Standing Committee unanimously approved, with minor revisions to the committee

notes to make them more uniform, the recommendations of the Advisory Committees on

Appellate, Bankruptcy, Civil, and Criminal Rules to publish for public comment proposed

amendments relating to electronic service and filing by self-represented litigants (SRLs). The

proposed amendments (collectively, “proposed SRL rules”) seek to: (1) increase SRL access to a

court’s electronic-filing system (or allow a form of electronic filing by alternative means) to file

pleadings and other court documents; and (2) after a complaint is filed and served, allow SRLs to

achieve service of subsequently filed documents in the electronic-filing system through the

electronic notice of filing or through a court-based electronic noticing program. The proposed

SRL rules relate to Appellate Rule 25; Bankruptcy Rules 5005, 8011, 9006, and 9036; Civil




Rules - Page 2
Rules 5 and 6; and Criminal Rules 45 and 49. With minor differences,1 these proposed

amendments are uniform across the four sets of rules. Each of these proposed amendments is

discussed in more detail in the summaries of actions by the Advisory Committees in this report.

            PRIVACY RULES FOR TAXPAYER INFORMATION AND MINORS’ NAMES

        The Standing Committee unanimously approved, with the addition of clarifying

revisions in each of the committee notes, the recommendations of the Advisory Committees on

Bankruptcy, Civil, and Criminal Rules to publish for public comment proposed amendments

relating to the redaction of social security and individual taxpayer identification numbers and

the use of pseudonyms to reference minors. The proposed amendments (collectively, the

“proposed privacy amendments”) seek to: (1) expand the redaction requirement of taxpayer

identifying information in civil and criminal cases; (2) require the use of pseudonyms rather

than initials when referencing minors in bankruptcy, civil, and criminal cases; and (3) clarify

that these rules apply to exhibits and attachments to electronically filed court documents. The

proposed privacy amendments relate to Bankruptcy Rule 9037, Civil Rule 5.2, and Criminal

Rule 49.1.2 Each of these proposed amendments is discussed in more detail in the summaries of

actions by the Advisory Committees in this report.




        1
          For example, the Bankruptcy, Civil, and Appellate Rules proposals use the term
“unrepresented,” while the Criminal Rule uses “self-represented.” (Many existing Bankruptcy, Civil, and
Appellate Rules already use “unrepresented.”) The Civil, Criminal, and Appellate Rules use the term
“parties,” while the Bankruptcy Rules use the term “individual.” (In the Bankruptcy context, there is a
concern that some small business entities might think that the use of “parties” would enable them to
proceed without counsel, while in the other contexts the greater worry is that nonparties might think that
they could file in any case they want.) Finally, the Civil, Criminal, and Appellate Rules refer to “the
party’s case,” while the Bankruptcy Rules refer simply to “the case.” (In the Bankruptcy context, “the
party’s case” might suggest that only the debtor is covered by the amendment.)
        2
         Any amendments to these rules will apply on appeal through existing Appellate Rule 25, which
incorporates them by reference. As set forth in the information items for the Appellate Rules Advisory
Committee, there is ongoing consideration of potential privacy amendments relating to certain aspects of
appeals.
                                                                                               Rules - Page 3
                          PRIVACY REPORT TO CONGRESS 2026

         Following the Standing Committee’s approval of the proposed privacy amendments for

publication and comment, the Committee also considered a draft 2026 Report of the Judicial

Conference of the United States on the Adequacy of Privacy Rules Prescribed Under the E-

Government Act of 2002 (the “2026 Privacy Report to Congress”). Section 205(c)(3)(C) of the

E-Government Act directs that, every two years, “the Judicial Conference shall submit to

Congress a report on the adequacy of [the privacy rules] to protect privacy and security.” The

most recent prior report was submitted to Congress in 2024.

         The 2026 Privacy Report to Congress covers the period from June 2024 to June 2026.

Part I of the report describes the proposed privacy amendments, as well as the status of other

privacy-related proposals to amend the Rules of Practice and Procedure. Part II of the report

describes ongoing judiciary implementation efforts by the Committee on Court Administration

and Case Management (CACM Committee), the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts, and

the FJC to protect privacy in court filings and opinions. Part III of the 2026 report discusses the

FJC’s recent studies relating to privacy concerns in court filings.

         The CACM Committee at its May 2026 meeting reviewed the draft 2026 Privacy Report

to Congress and endorsed a recommendation from the Standing Committee to the Judicial

Conference to approve the report (see Report of the Committee on Court Administration and

Case Management, at Agenda E-6). The Standing Committee then approved the report at its

meeting, to include any necessary changes to address the revisions to the privacy amendments

approved by the Standing Committee or other minor stylistic or technical changes.

         Recommendation: That the Judicial Conference approve the proposed 2026 Report of
         the Judicial Conference of the United States on the Adequacy of Privacy Rules
         Prescribed Under the E-Government Act of 2002, as set forth in Appendix A, and ask the
         Administrative Office Director to transmit it to Congress in accordance with the law.



Rules - Page 4
                     FEDERAL RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE

                  Amendments Recommended for Approval and Transmission

       The Advisory Committee on Appellate Rules recommended for final approval proposed

amendments to Appellate Rules 15, 29, and 32 and to the Appendix of Length Limits. The

Standing Committee unanimously approved the Advisory Committee’s recommendations, with

minor revisions correcting the placement of a sentence in the committee note to Rule 15 and

correcting cross-references in Rules 29 and 32(g) and the Appendix of Length Limits.

Rule 15 (Review or Enforcement of an Agency Order—How Obtained; Intervention)

       The proposed amendments to Rule 15 address issues that may arise when a petition for

review or enforcement of an agency decision is filed prematurely. In circuits that apply the

“incurably premature” doctrine, if a pending motion to reconsider an agency decision makes the

decision unreviewable in the court of appeals, then a new petition to review that agency decision

must be filed in the court of appeals once the agency decision becomes final. The proposed

amendments to Rule 15 would eliminate the need to refile the petition by adding a subdivision

providing that the original petition for review becomes effective upon the agency’s disposition of

the last reconsideration request. These changes would align Rule 15 with Rule 4(a)(4)(B)(i),

which relates to the effectiveness of a notice of appeal filed after a judgment is entered or

announced in the district court, but before the district court disposes of certain post-judgment

motions authorized under the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. The proposed amendment also

makes clear that it applies only when the agency order is “otherwise reviewable.”

Rule 29 (Brief of an Amicus Curiae)

       At its September 2025 session, the Judicial Conference approved final amendments to

Rule 29, together with conforming amendments to Rule 32 and the Appendix of Length Limits,

and authorized their transmittal to the Supreme Court with a recommendation that they be

                                                                                          Rules - Page 5
adopted by the Court and transmitted to Congress in accordance with the law (JCUS-SEP 2025,

p. 20). The amendments addressed several issues with respect to the contents of amicus briefs,

particularly as to required disclosures of relationships between the amicus and parties or

nonparties. In particular, the amendments would have required disclosure of whether a party or

its counsel has a majority ownership interest in or majority control of an amicus. In addition,

whereas the current rule requires disclosure of whether any nonparty (other than the amicus, its

members, or its counsel) contributed money intended to fund preparation or submission of the

brief, the proposed amendments would have limited this disclosure requirement to instances in

which the amount contributed or pledged to be contributed is greater than $100. The proposed

amendments also would have added a broader disclosure concerning the background of the

amicus—including its identity, history, experience, and interest. Finally, the proposed

amendments would have imposed an express word limit of 6,500 words on amicus briefs at the

initial merits stage rather than reference to “one half the maximum length authorized . . . for a

party’s principal brief.”

         After the amendments were transmitted to the Supreme Court, the Executive Committee

of the Judicial Conference raised concerns about a provision in what was then proposed Rule

29(e) relating to disclosures as to new members of amicus organizations. That provision would

have obligated amicus organizations to disclose brief-related contributions or pledges over $100

not only from nonmembers, as the current rules require, but also from relatively new members

who joined the organization within the previous 12 months. The Executive Committee noted

that this provision could interfere with the privacy of those organizations and of their members,

who may be chilled from contributing to their organization’s amicus briefs if they were required

to announce their membership to the public. Additionally, after transmission to the Supreme

Court, two other ambiguities or errors were separately identified in the proposed amendments:

Rules - Page 6
first, a potential ambiguity in what was then proposed Rule 29(d) regarding what required

disclosures a party or counsel must make when an amicus is required to disclose certain

information but fails to do so; and second, an unrevised cross-reference in the Appendix of

Length Limits. To address the Executive Committee’s concerns and to make appropriate

corrections, the Advisory Committee and the Standing Committee voted in March 2026 to

withdraw the amendment package, and the proposed amendments were not forwarded to

Congress.

       After further consideration by the Advisory Committee and the Standing Committee, the

revised proposed amendments to Rules 29 and 32 and the Appendix of Length Limits are

presented for approval. Specifically, the Advisory Committee and Standing Committee removed

the requirement of new-member contribution disclosure from the proposed amendments to

Rule 29 and corrected the identified ambiguity by clarifying that the requirement that parties and

counsel disclose information that an amicus must but has failed to disclose does not extend to

information about nonmember contributions. The Advisory Committee further determined that

republication of the amendments to Rule 29, with the conforming changes to Rule 32 and the

Appendix of Length Limits, was not required given the extensive public comment on the issue of

member disclosures and the technical nature of the additional revisions.

       The remainder of the proposed amendments to Rule 29, as revised, are the same.

Rule 32 (Form of Briefs, Appendices, and Other Papers) and Appendix of Length Limits

       The proposed amendment to Rule 32 conforms Rule 32(g)’s cross-references to the

updated sections of amended Rule 29. Similarly, the proposed amendment to the Appendix of

Length Limits conform the length limits for amicus briefs identified in the Appendix to the

proposed amendment to Rule 29.




                                                                                       Rules - Page 7
         Recommendation: That the Judicial Conference approve the proposed amendments to
         Appellate Rules 15, 29, and 32 and to the Appendix of Length Limits, as set forth
         in Appendix B, and transmit them to the Supreme Court for consideration with a
         recommendation that they be adopted by the Court and transmitted to Congress in
         accordance with the law.

                          Rules Approved for Publication and Comment

Rule 25 (Filing and Service)

         As part of the proposed SRL rules package, the Advisory Committee on Appellate Rules

recommended that a proposed amendment to Rule 25 be published for public comment in

August 2026. The Standing Committee unanimously approved the Advisory Committee’s

recommendation.

         The proposed amendments to Appellate Rule 25 provide that an unrepresented party is

presumptively authorized to use the court’s electronic-filing system to file documents in the case

and receive notice of case filings. The proposed amendments further provide that a court may

set reasonable conditions on an unrepresented party’s access to the court’s electronic-filing

system, but a court may not bar all unrepresented parties from using a court’s electronic-filing

system unless the court either includes reasonable exceptions to the prohibition or permits

unrepresented parties to use another electronic method for filing documents and for receiving

notice of court filings and orders. Finally, the proposed amendment would eliminate the

requirement for an unrepresented party (who files other than through the court’s electronic-filing

system) to make a separate (paper) service on a litigant who is registered to receive notice of

case activity from the court’s electronic-filing system. Service by the notice of case activity is

not effective if the filer learns that the filing did not reach the person to be served. In addition,

the proposed amendment provides that a court may require by local rule or court order a different

method of service for filings under seal and/or filings that initiate a proceeding in the court of

appeals under Rule 5, 6(c), 15, or 21.

Rules - Page 8
                                        Information Items

       The Advisory Committee met on April 16, 2026. In addition to the recommendations

discussed above, the Advisory Committee discussed several other issues, including continuing its

consideration of possible amendments to Rule 25 (Filing and Service) to require complete

redaction of taxpayer identifying information and the use of pseudonyms for minors, so that

some of the exemptions from privacy requirements at the trial level (Bankruptcy Rule 9037,

Civil Rule 5.2, and Criminal Rule 49.1) would not carry forward on appeal. The Advisory

Committee also continues its consideration of potential amendments to Rule 4 (Appeal as of

Right—When Taken) regarding reopening the time to appeal, Rule 8 (Stay or Injunction Pending

Appeal) regarding limits on administrative stays, and a possible new Rule 12.2 regarding

intervention on appeal, as well as the treatment of tribes in the Appellate Rules. Finally, the

Advisory Committee considered several new issues including a possible amendment to Rule 28

(Briefs) regarding introductions in briefs.

                   FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE

                  Amendments Recommended for Approval and Transmission

       The Advisory Committee on Bankruptcy Rules recommended for final approval

amendments to Bankruptcy Rule 2002 and amendments to Official Forms 101 and 106C. The

Standing Committee unanimously approved the Advisory Committee’s recommendations.

Rule 2002 (Notices)

       The proposed amendment to Rule 2002(o) would simplify the caption of most notices

given under Rule 2002 by requiring that they include only the information required by

Form 416B (the court’s name, the debtor’s name, the case number, the chapter under which the

case was filed, and a brief description of the document’s character) rather than the more

extensive information required under Rule 1005. As noted in the 2026 Privacy Report to

                                                                                         Rules - Page 9
Congress, this change would mean that most Rule 2002 notices would no longer be required to

include the last 4 digits of the debtor’s social-security or individual taxpayer-identification

number.

Official Form 101 (Voluntary Petition for Individuals Filing for Bankruptcy)

         The proposed amendment to Official Form 101 relates to the prompt in Question 4 in

Part 1 and clarifies that the question is attempting to elicit only the Employer Identification

Number (EIN), if any, of the individual filing for bankruptcy and not the EIN of any other person

(such as the debtor’s employer). The modification will help debtors avoid the error of providing

their employer’s EIN. Because multiple debtors have the same employer, deterring such debtors

from erroneously providing their employer’s EIN will avoid triggering an erroneous automated

report that the debtor has engaged in repeat filings.

Official Form 106C (Schedule C: The Property You Claim as Exempt)

         The proposed amendment to Form 106C requires the debtor to add the total dollar value

of the exemptions with a specific amount claimed under Column C in the form.

         Recommendation: That the Judicial Conference:

              a.   Approve the proposed amendments to Bankruptcy Rule 2002, as set forth in
                   Appendix C, and transmit them to the Supreme Court for consideration with a
                   recommendation that they be adopted by the Court and transmitted to Congress
                   in accordance with the law.

              b.   Approve, effective December 1, 2026, the proposed amendments to Bankruptcy
                   Official Forms 101 and 106C, as set forth in Appendix C, for use in all
                   bankruptcy proceedings commenced after the effective date and, insofar as just
                   and practicable, all proceedings pending on the effective date.

                          Rules Approved for Publication and Comment

         The Advisory Committee on Bankruptcy Rules submitted proposed amendments to

Bankruptcy Rules 2003, 5005, 8011, 9006(f), 9036, and 9037 with a recommendation that they




Rules - Page 10
be published for public comment in August 2026. The Standing Committee unanimously

approved the Advisory Committee’s recommendations.

Rule 2003 (Meeting of Creditors or Equity Security Holders)

       The proposed amendments to Rule 2003 would allow more time to convene the meeting

of creditors in chapter 12 and 13 cases, extending the deadline in chapter 12 cases from 35 to 60

days, and in chapter 13 cases, from 50 to 60 days, after the order for relief. The proposed

amendments would also expressly authorize meetings of creditors to be “conducted in person or

remotely” and would allow the U.S. trustee to designate in which manner a meeting would be

conducted.

Rules 5005 (Filing Papers and Sending Copies to the United States Trustee), 8011 (Filing and
Service; Signature), 9006(f) (Computing and Extending Time; Motions), and 9036 (Electronic
Notice and Service)

       As part of the SRL rules package, the proposed amendments to Rules 5005 and 8011

would provide that unrepresented individuals are presumptively authorized to use the court’s

electronic-filing system to file documents. The proposed amendments would permit courts to set

reasonable conditions and restrictions on access by unrepresented individuals to the court’s

electronic-filing system. However, the proposed amendments would not permit a bar on all

unrepresented individuals from using a court’s electronic-filing system, unless the court also

either includes reasonable exceptions to the prohibition, or permits unrepresented individuals to

use another electronic method for filing documents and an alternative electronic means for

receiving notice of court filings and orders.

       In addition, the proposed amendments to Rule 8011 would make service via a court’s

electronic-filing system the primary means of service. The proposed amendments would

eliminate the requirement of separate (paper) service (of papers filed other than through the

court’s electronic-filing system) on a litigant who is registered to receive a notice of case activity

                                                                                          Rules - Page 11
from the court’s electronic-filing system. However, service by a court’s electronic-filing system

is not effective if a filer learns that it did not reach the person to be served. Further, the proposed

amendments provide that if a document is filed under seal, a court may provide an order or local

rule that the document be served by other means.

         The proposed amendments to Rule 9006 would change a cross-reference to conform the

rule to match proposed amendments to Civil Rule 5.

         The proposed amendments to Rule 9036 would address filings by unrepresented

individuals, providing that because documents filed in paper form are uploaded by the court into

the court’s electronic-filing system, there is no need to require separate paper service by the filer

on case participants who receive an electronic notice of the filing from the court’s electronic-

filing system. In addition, Rule 9036(d), like Rule 8011(c)(3), deals with the impact of delays

between filing and uploading to the court’s electronic-filing system.

Rule 9037 (Protecting Privacy for Filings)

         As part of the package of proposed privacy amendments, the proposed amendments to

Bankruptcy Rule 9037 share two features with the proposed amendments to Criminal Rule 49.1

and Civil Rule 5.2. First, the proposed amendments would make clear that the redaction

requirement applies to attachments, exhibits, and all other documents in a court filing. Second,

the proposed amendments would require the use of pseudonyms for minors. Because of the

unique context of bankruptcy proceedings and practice, the proposed amendments do not adopt

the complete redaction requirement for taxpayer identifying information or the extension of the

redaction requirement to EINs that is proposed in the privacy amendments to the civil and

criminal rules.




Rules - Page 12
                                        Information Items

       The Advisory Committee on Bankruptcy Rules met on April 15, 2026. In addition to the

recommendations discussed above, the Advisory Committee discussed several matters, including

continued consideration of a suggestion to amend Rule 9031 (Using Masters Not Authorized) to

permit the use of special masters in bankruptcy cases and new suggestions regarding possible

amendments to Rule 4004 (Granting or Denying a Discharge) and possible amendments to

Form 106C (Schedule C: The Property You Claim as Exempt (individuals)).

                        FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE

                     Rules Recommended for Approval and Transmission

       The Advisory Committee on Civil Rules recommended for final approval proposed

amendments to Civil Rules 7.1, 26, 41(a), 45(b), 45(c), and 81. After minor clarifying revisions

to the proposed amendments to Rules 26 and 45(b), the Standing Committee unanimously

approved the Advisory Committee’s recommendations.

Rule 7.1 (Disclosure Statement)

       The proposed amendment to the disclosures required under Rule 7.1(a)(1) requires any

party or would-be intervenor that is a private business organization to disclose any publicly held

business organization that “directly or indirectly” owns 10 percent or more of the party or

intervenor. The proposal responds to concerns raised that the current rule, which requires

disclosure only of “any parent corporation and any publicly held corporation owning 10 percent

or more of its stock,” may result in nondisclosure of a “grandparent” corporation. This change is

intended to assist judges in evaluating if recusal is appropriate consistent with updated guidance

in Committee on Codes of Conduct Advisory Opinion No. 57, which explains that corporate

ownership of at least 10 percent of a party creates a rebuttable presumption of parental control

and that a judge must recuse if they “conclude that a party is controlled by a corporation in which

                                                                                       Rules - Page 13
the judge owns stock.” Another change substitutes the term “business organization” for the word

“corporation” to clarify that the disclosure requirement applies to different forms of business

entities.

Rule 26 (Duty to Disclose; General Provisions Governing Discovery)

         The proposed amendment to Rule 26(a) relating to pretrial disclosures requires disclosure

of the party’s expectation as to whether each of its witnesses’ testimony will be in person or

remote. The Committee made a minor revision to the language in the proposed amendment to

clarify that it relates only to the party’s expectations as to whether testimony will be in person or

remote at the time the disclosure is made.

Rule 41(a) (Dismissal of Actions)

         The proposed amendments to Rule 41(a) clarify that a plaintiff may obtain a voluntary

dismissal of one or more claims raised in a complaint without dismissing the entire action. This

change responds to decisions in some courts interpreting the current language to mean that only

an entire case, that is, all claims against all defendants, or only all claims against one or more

defendants, could be dismissed under the rule. The proposed amendments also provide that a

stipulation of dismissal need be signed only by parties who remain in the action at the time of the

dismissal.

Rule 45(b) (Subpoena—Service)

         The proposed amendment to Rule 45(b) clarifies how a subpoena for testimony may be

served and whether the witness fee must be tendered simultaneously with service. The proposed

amendment borrows two methods of service from Rule 4(e)(2)’s methods for serving a complaint

on an individual—personal service or leaving a copy at the individual’s dwelling or usual place of

abode with someone of suitable age and discretion who resides there. The proposed amendment

also adds an additional method of service through the mail or commercial carrier if confirmation

Rules - Page 14
of actual receipt can be provided, and further authorizes the court to approve another means of

service for good cause. The proposed amendment also includes two other changes: (1) relaxing

the current requirement that witness fees be tendered at the time of service, and (2) providing a 14-

day notice period (subject to shortening by the court for good cause) when the subpoena requires

attendance at a trial, hearing, or deposition. The Committee made a minor revision to the language

in the proposed amendment to move clarifying language in the committee note into the rule text

relating to confirmation of actual receipt when a subpoena is served by mail or commercial carrier.

Rule 45(c) (Subpoena—Remote Testimony)

       The proposed amendment to Rule 45(c) adds a new subsection (c)(2) to address subpoenas

for remote trial testimony. The proposed new subsection clarifies that the “place of attendance for

remote testimony is the location where the person is commanded to appear in person.” Under new

Rule 45(c)(2), the court’s subpoena power for in-court remote testimony extends nationwide so

long as the subpoena does not command the witness to travel farther than the distance authorized

under Rule 45(c)(1). The proposed amendment does not affect the standards governing whether

to permit in-court remote testimony.

Rule 81 (Jury Demand After Removal)

       The proposed amendment to Rule 81(c) would provide that a jury demand must always

be made after removal if no such demand was made before removal and a party desires a jury

trial. It would also set the time limit to make the required demand.

       Recommendation: That the Judicial Conference approve the proposed
       amendments to Civil Rules 7.1, 26, 41, 45, and 81, as set forth in Appendix D,
       and transmit them to the Supreme Court for consideration with a recommendation
       that they be adopted by the Court and transmitted to Congress in accordance with
       the law.




                                                                                        Rules - Page 15
                          Rules Approved for Publication and Comment

         The Advisory Committee on Civil Rules submitted proposed amendments to Civil Rule 5

with conforming amendments to Rule 6(d), and Civil Rule 5.2, with a recommendation that they

be published for public comment in August 2026. The Standing Committee unanimously

approved the Advisory Committee’s recommendation.

Rules 5 (Serving and Filing Pleadings and Other Papers) and 6(d) (Computing and Extending
Time; Time for Motion Papers)

         As part of the SRL rules package, the proposed amendments to Rule 5 are generally

consistent with the proposed amendments to the Bankruptcy Rules and the Criminal Rules and

would presumptively allow unrepresented parties in civil cases to use the court’s electronic-filing

system to file papers and receive notice of activity in the case, unless a court order or local rule

provides otherwise. The courts would be expressly authorized to impose reasonable conditions

and restrictions on electronic access. However, the proposed amendments would prevent a court

from barring all self-represented litigants from using the court’s electronic-filing system unless

the prohibition either included reasonable exceptions or was paired with another electronic

method for filing papers and receiving notice.

         The proposed amendments to Rule 5 retain the existing authority to require electronic

filing by a self-represented litigant by case-specific order or by local rule with reasonable

exceptions. Additionally, Rule 5 would state that no certificate of service is required when

service occurs through the court’s electronic-filing system under the amended provisions,

although service by a court’s electronic-filing system is not effective if a filer learns that it did

not reach the person to be served. Further, the proposed amendments provide that if a document

is filed under seal, a court may provide by order or local rule that the document be served by

other means. Finally, proposed amended Rule 5 would eliminate the need for separate paper

service of post-complaint filings on persons who will receive a notice of case activity through the
Rules - Page 16
court’s electronic-filing system, and deals with the impact of delays between filing and

uploading to the court’s electronic-filing system.

       The proposed amendments to Rule 6 would conform cross-references to Rule 5.

Rule 5.2 (Privacy Protections for Filings Made with the Court)

       As part of the package of proposed privacy amendments, the proposed amendments to

Civil Rule 5.2 are generally consistent with the changes to Criminal Rule 49.1 and require

complete redaction of social security numbers (SSNs) and individual taxpayer identification

numbers (ITINs), as well as EINs and adoption taxpayer identification numbers in civil cases.

The proposed amendments to Rule 5.2 would further require the use of pseudonyms when a filed

document references a person who is a minor at the time of filing. Finally, the proposed

amendments would clarify that the redaction requirements apply to all documents in the court

filing, including exhibits and attachments. The proposed committee notes make clear, however,

that existing exemptions to the redaction requirement, or additional redactions required pursuant

to a protective order, are not altered by the proposed amendment.

                                        Information Items

       The Advisory Committee on Civil Rules met on April 14, 2026. In addition to the

matters discussed above, the Advisory Committee continued to discuss proposals to require

disclosures regarding third-party litigation funding and to amend Rule 43 (Taking Testimony) to

relax the standards governing permission for remote testimony. The Advisory Committee also

continues to study suggestions relating to Rule 23 (Class Actions), Rule 35 (Physical and Mental

Examinations), and Rule 58’s “Separate Document” requirement.

       The Advisory Committee decided to remove from its agenda proposals concerning Fair

Labor Standards Act collective actions, artificial intelligence “hallucinations,” algorithmic




                                                                                        Rules - Page 17
spoliation of discoverable material, protective order templates, and mandatory assistance for self-

represented litigants.

                         FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE

                         Rules Recommended for Approval and Transmission

         The Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules recommended for final approval proposed

amendments to Criminal Rule 17. The Standing Committee unanimously approved the Advisory

Committee’s recommendation after rephrasing proposed paragraph (c)(6), making a minor

stylistic change to the rule, and clarifying the committee note (as described below).

Rule 17 (Subpoena)

         The proposed amendments focus primarily on Rule 17(c), which governs subpoenas for

production. The proposed amendments clarify that third-party subpoenas for production may be

issued for proceedings in addition to trial. This includes proceedings where such subpoenas are

most likely to be needed or are already used regularly in many districts, as well as proceedings

for which there is statutory or rule authority for parties to present evidence (i.e., detention,

revocation, suppression, and sentencing). With the court’s permission, the rule also authorizes

such subpoenas for other evidentiary hearings.

         The proposed amendments also set forth a modified version of the test announced in

Nixon v. United States, 418 U.S. 683 (1974), as the standard for the issuance of third-party

subpoenas for production. The modified test as proposed is intended to provide both prosecution

and defense with an adequate and more uniform opportunity across districts to obtain needed

evidence from third parties.

         Other proposed amendments to Rule 17 clarify when a party must file a motion

requesting the court’s permission to serve a subpoena for production of documents: when the

subpoena requests personal or confidential information about a victim, when the subpoena is

Rules - Page 18
requested by a self-represented party, or when a local rule or court order requires a motion.

When no motion is required, a party may serve a subpoena for production on an ex parte basis.

When a motion is required, the proposed amendments provide that the court “must” allow a party

to file it ex parte if good cause is shown. The proposed amendments further address ex parte

subpoena practice by setting a default rule that a party need not disclose its subpoena to another

party if no motion is required.

       The proposed amendments also state the circumstances under which the recipient of the

subpoena must produce the designated items to the court rather than directly to the requesting

party. In addition, the amendments address the disclosure of material produced in response to a

subpoena, disapproving the practice in some courts in which all produced items must be

provided to the opposing party, regardless of whether the items would otherwise be subject to

discovery. By providing that the rule does not require the disclosure of produced items to a party

that did not request the subpoena, the proposed amendments seek to ensure that Rule 17 is not

interpreted to disturb the law regulating disclosure between the parties found in Rule 16 and

elsewhere. Finally, the proposed amendments clarify, as to each subdivision of Rule 17, whether

it applies to subpoenas for testimony, subpoenas for production, or both.

       The Standing Committee rephrased proposed paragraph (c)(6) to make clear that Rule 17

does not require disclosure of produced items to a party that did not request them and does not

alter existing disclosure and discovery requirements. It revised the corresponding section of the

committee note to clarify that the amendments to Rule 17 do not modify existing law regarding

the timing of any disclosures.

       Recommendation: That the Judicial Conference approve the proposed amendments to
       Criminal Rule 17, as set forth in Appendix E, and transmit them to the Supreme Court for
       consideration with a recommendation that they be adopted by the Court and transmitted
       to Congress in accordance with the law.



                                                                                       Rules - Page 19
                          Rules Approved for Publication and Comment

         The Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules submitted proposed amendments to Rule 11

(with conforming amendments to Rule 32), Rule 49 (with conforming amendments to Rule

45(c)), and Rule 49.1, with a recommendation that they be published for public comment in

August 2026. The Standing Committee unanimously approved the Advisory Committee’s

recommendations, with revisions to clarify language in the text of the rule (as described below).

Rule 11 (Pleas)

         Rule 11(b)(1)(M) requires the court to advise the defendant at the plea proceeding of “the

court’s obligation to . . . consider . . . possible departures under the Sentencing Guidelines.”

However, the 2025 amendments to the U.S. Sentencing Commission Guidelines Manual deleted

most of the provisions in Chapter Five, Part K (Departures), and revised U.S.S.G. § 1B1.1(a) to

eliminate the requirement that the court consider departures at step two of a three-step sentencing

process. As revised, § 1B1.1 now provides for a two-step process, considering at step one “the

kinds of sentence and the guideline range as set forth in the guidelines,” and at step two, “other

applicable factors in 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a).” The proposed amendment to Rule 11(b)(1)(M)

would remove the reference to “possible departures under the Sentencing Guidelines,” thus

reflecting the current two-step sentencing process. The Standing Committee revised the

proposed rule text to ensure that defendants would continue to be advised of the court's

obligation to calculate and consider the sentencing-guideline range.

Rule 32 (Sentencing and Judgment)

         Rule 32(h) requires the court to provide the parties with reasonable notice of a

possible departure from the Sentencing Guidelines range on a ground not identified for

departure in the presentence report or in a party’s prehearing submission. Because the

Sentencing Guidelines no longer employ the concept of departures, the proposed

Rules - Page 20
amendment to Rule 32 would eliminate subdivision (h). To avoid re-lettering the

remainder of the rule, subdivision (h) would be reserved.

Rules 49 (Serving and Filing Papers) and 45(c) (Computing and Extending Time)

       As part of the SRL rules package, the proposed amendments to Rule 49 and conforming

amendments to Rule 45(c) are generally consistent with the proposed amendments to the

Bankruptcy and Civil Rules regarding electronic filing and service by self-represented litigants.

The proposed amendments to Rule 49 would allow self-represented parties to use the court’s

electronic-filing system to file papers and receive notice of activity in the case, unless a court

order or local rule provides otherwise. They would expressly authorize courts to impose

reasonable conditions and restrictions on electronic access. However, the proposed amendments

would prevent a court from barring all self-represented litigants from using the court’s

electronic-filing system unless the prohibition either included reasonable exceptions or was

paired with another electronic method for filing papers and receiving notice. Unlike the

Bankruptcy and Civil Rules, and in accordance with the current Criminal Rule, proposed

amended Rule 49 would not authorize a court to require self-represented litigants to file

electronically.

       The proposed Rule 49 amendments would eliminate the need for separate paper service

of post-complaint filings on persons who will receive a notice of case activity through the court’s

electronic-filing system, although service by a court’s electronic-filing system is not effective if a

filer learns that it did not reach the person to be served. Further, the proposed amendments

provide that if a document is filed under seal, a court may provide by order or local rule that the

document be served by other means. The amendments also provide that no certificate of service

is required when service occurs through the court’s electronic-filing system under the amended

provisions.


                                                                                          Rules - Page 21
         Criminal Rule 45(c) would be amended to conform cross-references to Rule 49.

Criminal Rule 49.1 (Privacy Protections for Filings Made with the Court)

         As part of the package of proposed privacy amendments, the proposed amendments to

Rule 49.1 addresses two privacy-related issues—redaction of taxpayer-identification information

and the use of pseudonyms for minors—in criminal filings that are available to the public

through the judiciary’s electronic-filing system. These proposed amendments are consistent with

the proposed amendments to the parallel privacy provisions in Civil Rule 5.2.

         First, the proposed amendment requires complete redaction of taxpayer identifying

information rather than redaction of all but the last four numbers. Second, the proposed

amendments expand the covered taxpayer identifying information that must be redacted to

include not only SSNs and ITINs, but also EINs. Third, the proposed amendment clarifies that

the redaction requirement applies not only to pleadings and briefs, but also any attachments and

exhibits. Fourth, the proposed amendment changes the requirement to provide initials for minors

when they are referenced in filings and would now require the use of a pseudonym.

                                        Information Items

         The Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules met on April 29, 2026. In addition to the

matters discussed above, the Advisory Committee continued its discussions regarding proposed

amendments to Rule 40 (Arrest for Failing to Appear in Another District or for Violating

Conditions of Release Set in Another District). The Advisory Committee also formed a new

subcommittee to consider proposed revisions to Rule 15, which governs depositions.




Rules - Page 22
                                                                                     (Rev. 8/27/26)



                                  FEDERAL RULES OF EVIDENCE

                        Rules Recommended for Approval and Transmission

        The Advisory Committee on Evidence Rules recommended for final approval proposed

amendments to Evidence Rule 609. The Standing Committee unanimously approved the

Advisory Committee’s recommendations.

Rule 609 (Impeachment by Evidence of a Criminal Conviction)

        The proposed amendment to Rule 609(a)(1)(B) addresses the standard under

which evidence of prior convictions not based on falsity may be introduced to attack a

testifying criminal defendant’s character for truthfulness. Under the proposed

amendment, evidence of a non-falsity based prior conviction would not be admissible to

impeach a criminal defendant unless its probative value “substantially” outweighs the

risk of unfair prejudice to the defendant. The proposed amendment would result in the

provision becoming more exclusionary, because many courts have erred in allowing

broad impeachment with prior non-falsity based convictions, contrary to the original

intent of the rule—a problem compounded by the fact that a ruling admitting convictions

is not appealable unless the defendant takes the stand and gets impeached. With this

amendment, the Advisory Committee aims to reduce the risk that Rule 609 will unduly

deter criminal defendants from exercising their right to testify. In addition, the proposed

amendment to Rule 609(b) would clarify that the 10-year time period for the rule’s

applicability is measured from the date of conviction or end of confinement, whichever is

later, until the date of trial.

        In August 2026, the Executive Committee, during its preparation of the proposed

discussion and consent calendars for the September 2026 Judicial Conference session, called the

Standing Committee’s attention to several concerns with the proposed amendments and

                                                                                       Rules - Page 23
(Rev. 8/27/26)



requested further examination. The Executive Committee’s concerns relate primarily to the

explanations in the committee note for inserting the word “substantially” into the rule. If

changes are made to the committee note to address those concerns, then the question becomes

what justifies the proposed change to the rule. These concerns include the following:

        First, the Executive Committee raised concerns that Congress in enacting Rule 609(a) did

         not impose “a reverse balancing test” as stated in the committee note. Instead, Congress

         imposed a neutral balancing test allowing admissibility “if the probative value of the

         evidence outweighs its prejudicial effect” (emphasis added). In the Executive

         Committee’s view, the proposed amendment would create a presumption of

         inadmissibility contrary to the intent of Congress reflected in the text of the rule adopted

         in 1975.

        Second, the Executive Committee raised concerns about language in the proposed

         committee note that the new proposed test “is more protective so as not to infringe on the

         accused’s constitutional right to testify.” The Executive Committee does not believe that

         the Supreme Court has held that impeachment by prior felony conviction infringes on a

         constitutional right to testify.

        Third, the Executive Committee raised concerns about the fourth paragraph of the

         proposed committee note, which may be perceived as setting forth rule-like guidance

         rather than explaining the proposed rule. Specifically, the paragraph purports to guide

         district courts on how to admit “evidence of a criminal conviction” without a rule to

         support the guidance.

         In response to these concerns, the Standing Committee in August 2026

unanimously voted to withdraw the recommendation and to return the proposal to the



Rules - Page 24
                                                                                      (Rev. 8/27/26)



Advisory Committee on Evidence Rules to allow it to further consider the proposed

amendments in light of these concerns.

                         Rules Approved for Publication and Comment

       The Advisory Committee on Evidence Rules submitted proposed amendments to

Rules 902 and 104 with a recommendation that they be published for public comment in

August 2026. The Standing Committee unanimously approved the Advisory Committee’s

recommendations with a minor revision to Rule 104.

Rule 902 (Evidence That Is Self-Authenticating)

       The proposed amendment to Rule 902 would add Indian Tribes and Nations to the list of

entities in Rule 902(1)(A) whose public records are self-authenticating, as the Advisory

Committee saw no reason to differentiate the Tribes and Nations from the many other

government entities whose records are currently self-authenticating under the rule.

Rule 104 (Preliminary Questions)

       The proposed amendment to Rule 104(a) would codify the holding in Bourjaily v. United

States, 483 U.S. 171, 175 (1987), that preliminary questions of fact under Rule 104(a) are to be

determined by a preponderance of the evidence. The proposed amendments to Rule 104(b)

would eliminate the concept of “conditional” relevance and provide that the standard of proof for

all questions of relevance is whether a jury could reasonably find that the evidence has a

tendency to make a fact of consequence more or less probable than without the evidence. In

addition, the proposed amendments would eliminate the phrase “proof sufficient to support a

finding” from Rule 104(b); but the rule does not change the standard of proof established by the

Supreme Court in Huddleston v. United States, 485 U.S. 681, 687 (1988), that the court must

decide whether the “jury could reasonably find” that the evidence is relevant.




                                                                                        Rules - Page 25
(Rev. 8/27/26)



                                       Information Items

         The Advisory Committee met on May 7, 2026. In addition to the recommendations

discussed above, the Advisory Committee discussed several other issues, including continued

consideration of a possible New Rule 707 to address evidence that is the product of artificial

intelligence and a possible new subsection (c) in Rule 901 (Authenticating or Identifying

Evidence) to address deepfake evidence. Finally, the Advisory Committee considered the

implications of Smith v. Arizona on Rule 703 (Bases of an Expert’s Opinion Testimony).

                                                     Respectfully submitted,



                                                     James C. Dever III, Chair

                                      Paul J. Barbadoro            Edward M. Mansfield
                                      Todd Blanche                 Troy A. McKenzie
                                      Elizabeth J. Cabraser        Andrew J. Pincus
                                      Louis A. Chaiten             Allison J. Rushing
                                      Colm F. Connolly             Amul Thapar
                                      Joan N. Ericksen             Bart H. Williams
                                      Stephen A. Higginson


Appendix A – Proposed 2026 Report of the Judicial Conference of the United States on the
             Adequacy of Privacy Rules Prescribed Under the E-Government Act of 2002

Appendix B – Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure

Appendix C – Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules of Bankruptcy Procedure

Appendix D – Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure

Appendix E – Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure




Rules - Page 26
                                                    Agenda E-19 (Appendix A)
                                                                      Rules
                                                             September 2026



Proposed 2026 Report of the Judicial Conference of the United States
           on the Adequacy of Privacy Rules Prescribed
               Under the E-Government Act of 2002




                       PREPARED FOR THE
           U.S. SENATE AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

           JUDICIAL CONFERENCE OF THE UNITED STATES

                          September 2026




                                                           Rules Appendix A - Page 1
 PROPOSED 2026 REPORT OF THE JUDICIAL CONFERENCE OF THE UNITED STATES
            ON THE ADEQUACY OF PRIVACY RULES PRESCRIBED
                  UNDER THE E-GOVERNMENT ACT OF 2002


INTRODUCTION

        The E-Government Act of 2002 directed the judiciary to promulgate rules, under the Rules
Enabling Act, “to protect privacy and security concerns relating to electronic filing of documents
and the public availability … of documents filed electronically.” Pub. L. No. 107-347, 116 Stat.
2914, § 205(c)(3)(A)(i). Section 205(c)(3)(C) of the E-Government Act further directs that, every
two years, “the Judicial Conference shall submit to Congress a report on the adequacy of those
rules to protect privacy and security.” Pub. L. No. 107-347, 116 Stat. 2915, § 205(c)(3)(C).
Pursuant to this directive, the Judicial Conference hereby submits this report for the period from
July 1, 2024, to June 30, 2026. It proceeds in four sections:

         •   Part I discusses the status of suggested rule amendments identified in the 2024 Report
             and whether any privacy and security related suggestions for rules changes have been
             received since that time.

         •   Part II discusses ongoing implementation efforts by the Administrative Office of the
             United States Courts (the AO), the Federal Judicial Center (the FJC), and others to
             protect privacy in court filings and opinions.

         •   Part III discusses research undertaken by the FJC to assess adherence to the privacy
             rules.

         •   Part IV concludes with a summary and an overview of anticipated next steps.

PART I: POTENTIAL RULE AMENDMENTS RELATED TO PRIVACY AND SECURITY CONCERNS

        This section addresses the status of suggested privacy-related rule amendments discussed
in the 2024 Report and identifies any additional rules suggestions pertaining to privacy or security
concerns relating to electronically filed documents received since that time. Part I.A. provides an
overview of the current privacy rules. Part I.B. discusses proposed rule amendments relating to
complete redaction of taxpayer identification numbers in public court filings. Part I.C. discusses
proposed rule amendments to require the use of pseudonyms when reference is made to minors in
public court filings. Part I.D. addresses the status of amendments identified in the 2024 Report
relating to Appellate Form 4, which requires the disclosure of personal financial information in
applications to proceed in forma pauperis in appeals. Part I.E. provides an update on other
suggestions for rule changes identified in the 2024 Report. Part I.F. identifies any suggestions to
amend the rules of practice and procedure since the 2024 Report insofar as they relate to privacy
concerns in electronically filed documents.



                                                 1
Rules Appendix A - Page 2
        A. Overview of the Privacy Rules

        In accordance with the mandate of the E-Government Act of 2002 for the judiciary to
promulgate rules of procedure to address privacy and security concerns regarding electronic access
to court filings, the rules of practice and procedure were amended, effective December 1, 2007, to
include the following rules (the privacy rules) – Civil Rule 5.2, Criminal Rule 49.1, Bankruptcy
Rule 9037, and Appellate Rule 25(a)(5). In compliance with Section § 205(c)(3)(A)(ii) of the Act,
which provides that “[s]uch rules shall provide to the extent practicable for uniform treatment of
privacy and security issues,” Pub. L. No. 107-347, 116 Stat. 2914, the privacy rules for trial-level
proceedings (civil, criminal, and bankruptcy) follow a generally uniform approach. Subject to
specified exemptions, 1 those rules require that unless otherwise ordered by the court, filers must
redact from documents filed with the court:

        (1) all but the last four digits of an individual’s social-security number or taxpayer-
            identification number (SSNs and ITINs);

        (2) the month and day of an individual’s birth;

        (3) all but the initial letters of a known minor’s name;

        (4) all but the last four digits of a financial account number; and

        (5) in criminal cases, all but the city and state of an individual’s home address.

        With respect to appeals, Appellate Rule 25(a)(5) applies the redaction standard from the
case below, either Civil Rule 5.2, Criminal Rule 49.1, or Bankruptcy Rule 9037. In other cases
(for example, direct appeals from agencies), Civil Rule 5.2 generally applies. Bankruptcy Rule
8011, which governs filings in bankruptcy appeals from bankruptcy courts to district courts or
bankruptcy appellate panels, does not currently have a privacy provision because Bankruptcy Rule
9037 applies to such appeals.

        To further protect private information in Social Security appeals and immigration cases,
which include unredacted records from administrative and agency actions, the civil and criminal
rules also limit remote electronic access to those case files to the parties and their attorneys.
Members of the public who wish to view these files must access them at the courthouse. See Civil
Rule 5.2(c); Criminal Rule 49.1.(c). Only the docket and any orders or decisions relating to
disposition of these cases are available remotely. 2 Appellate Rule 25(a)(5) also limits remote
        1
          For example, in civil, criminal, and bankruptcy cases, the redaction requirement does not apply
to the record of any administrative or agency proceeding, the official record of a state-court proceeding,
filings made under seal, and financial account information related to real property subject to a forfeiture
proceeding.
        2
         As discussed infra in Part III of this report, in April 2024, the Federal Judicial Center (FJC)
published a study on Redaction of Non-Government Party Names in Social Security and Immigration Case


                                                    2
                                                                                    Rules Appendix A - Page 3
access to records in Social Security and immigration cases as in Civil Rule 5.2(c), and takes the
same approach with respect to petitions for review of a benefits decision of the Railroad Retirement
Board under the Railroad Retirement Act.

        As additional protection for private information, the privacy rules contain provisions
relating to filing under seal without redaction and seeking protective orders to require redaction or
limit a nonparty’s remote electronic access to a court filing. See Civil Rule 5.2(d) & (e); Criminal
Rule 49.1(d) & (e); Bankruptcy Rule 9037(c)-(e).

         B. Potential Amendments Requiring Complete Redaction of Taxpayer Identification
            Numbers in Public Court Filings

        As detailed in the 2024 Report, Senator Ron Wyden suggested in 2022 that the rules
committees reconsider earlier proposals to require complete redaction of SSNs in court filings,
rather than redaction of all but the last four numbers. In response to that suggestion, the Committee
on the Rules of Practice and Procedure (the Standing Committee) formed a working group to assist
with coordinated efforts by the advisory committees to evaluate this proposal. After evaluating
the scope of potential amendments, the advisory committees focused on the following:

         (1) Whether the goal of uniformity among all rule sets with regard to redaction of
             taxpayer identification numbers continues to be appropriate in light of the special
             considerations regarding the use of the debtor’s SSN in bankruptcy cases;

         (2) Whether other types of taxpayer identification numbers, such as Employer
             Identification Numbers (EINs) and Adoption Taxpayer Identification Numbers
             (ATINs), 3 should be completely redacted in addition to SSNs and ITINs; and

         (3) Whether any other amendments are appropriate in light of the findings of the Federal
             Judicial Center’s April 2024 study and November 2024 supplemental analysis on the
             incidence of unredacted SSNs found in public court records in PACER. 4



Documents to evaluate the prevalence of unredacted non-government party names in judicial opinions in
Social Security and immigration cases and to identify practices adopted by courts to redact this information.
At the request of the Judicial Conference Committee on Court Administration and Case Management
(CACM), the FJC conducted a supplemental study, published in November 2024.

         The privacy rules do not expressly address Employer Identification Numbers (EINs), which the
         3

IRS requires for individuals and entities that have employees and need to pay employment or other related
taxes. EINs are also required to operate a business entity. An Adoption Taxpayer Identification Number
(ATIN) is a temporary taxpayer identification number for a child in a domestic adoption if the adoptive
parents do not have and/or are unable to obtain the child's SSN while the final adoption is pending.
         4
             See infra Part III regarding the FJC’s studies relating to privacy concerns in court filings.


                                                         3
Rules Appendix A - Page 4
        These issues were raised and discussed at advisory committee meetings from the fall of
2024 through the spring of 2026. In their April 2026 meetings, the Civil Rules, Criminal Rules,
and Bankruptcy Rules Advisory Committees voted to recommend that proposed amendments to
the privacy rules be published for public comment in accordance with the Rules Enabling Act
process. At its June 2026 meeting, the Standing Committee approved those recommendations,
and the proposed privacy amendments are slated for publication for public comment in August
2026. These proposed amendments would do the following to address the three issues identified
above:

    (1) Require complete redaction of SSNs and ITINs in civil and criminal cases (Civil Rule 5.2
        and Criminal Rule 49.1) but retain the existing rule (Bankruptcy Rule 9037) requiring
        redaction of all but the last four digits of an individual’s SSN or taxpayer-identification
        number for proceedings in bankruptcy court in light of the unique needs of bankruptcy
        cases. 5

    (2) Provide that in civil and criminal cases (Civil Rule 5.2 and Criminal Rule 49.1), complete
        redaction applies not only to SSNs and ITINs, but also EINs and ATINs. 6

    (3) Clarify that the redaction requirements in civil, criminal and bankruptcy cases (Civil Rule
        5.2, Criminal Rule 49.1, and Bankruptcy Rule 9037) apply to all documents in the court
        filing, including exhibits and attachments. This change responds to the FJC’s finding that
        most unredacted SSNs in public filings appear in those documents. The proposed
        committee notes make clear, however, that existing exemptions to the redaction
        requirement under subsection (b) of these rules, or additional redactions required pursuant
        to a protective order, are not altered by the proposed amendment..

        The Advisory Committee on Appellate Rules has been considering adding another layer of
privacy protection on appeal, requiring redactions in appellate filings even of material that need
not be redacted under the Civil, Criminal, and Bankruptcy Rules. It was poised to ask the Standing
Committee to publish a proposal along these lines but, at its April 2026 meeting, new concerns
were raised about the breadth and impact of that proposal. In particular, the U.S. Department of

        5
          As noted in the 2024 Report, in connection with Senator Wyden’s suggestion, the Bankruptcy
Rules Committee, through its privacy subcommittee, worked with the FJC to survey debtor attorneys,
chapter 7, 12, and 13 trustees, creditor attorneys, various tax authorities and representatives of the National
Association of Attorneys General about whether bankruptcy forms that currently require inclusion of the
debtor’s redacted SSN must or should continue to do so. As set forth in the Bankruptcy Rules Advisory
Committee Report to the Standing Committee in January 2026, the surveys undertaken by the FJC indicated
that a significant number of bankruptcy specialists oppose the idea of removing the truncated SSN. See
Agenda Book, Report of the Bankruptcy Rules Advisory Committee, Committee on the Rules of Practice
and Procedure, January 2026, page 166, available at: https://www.uscourts.gov/forms-rules/records-rules-
committees/agenda-books.
        6
          This proposed change would not apply in bankruptcy. In bankruptcy cases, for example,
disclosure of the full EIN is required on certain forms.


                                                      4
                                                                                       Rules Appendix A - Page 5
Justice raised concern (echoed by others) about the costs and difficulties involved in redacting the
contents of an appendix or the excerpts of record. The possibility that a party might forfeit this
additional layer of protection was also raised. Because any changes made to the Civil, Criminal,
and Bankruptcy Rules will automatically flow through to the courts of appeals, the Advisory
Committee decided to study these concerns further before seeking to impose another layer of
protection, and it formed a subcommittee to do so. The Bankruptcy Rules Committee will follow
the work of the Appellate Rules Advisory Committee on this issue to consider amendments to
Bankruptcy Rule 8011.

         The 2024 Report also identified suggestions that would remove the partially redacted
SSNs and full EINs from some bankruptcy notices and forms. Specifically, as stated in the 2024
Report, Bankruptcy Rule 2002(n) (now Rule 2002(o)) requires that the caption of every notice
given under that rule comply with Bankruptcy Rule 1005. That caption requires, among other
things, the debtor’s full EIN, the last four digits of the debtor’s SSN or debtor’s individual
taxpayer-identification number, any other federal taxpayer identification number, and all other
names used within eight years before filing the petition. The Bankruptcy Rules Advisory
Committee considered this suggestion and proposed amendments to Rule 2002 to provide that
most Rule 2002 notices may use the caption described in Official Form 416B, which requires only
the court’s name, the name of the debtor, the case number, the chapter under which the case was
filed, and a brief description of the document’s character. Those proposed changes were published
for public comment in August 2025. After receiving no comments, final amendments to Rule
2002 were approved by the Bankruptcy Rules Advisory Committee at its spring 2026 meeting and
recommended by the Standing Committee at its June 2026 meeting for adoption by the Judicial
Conference at its September 2026 session.

         C. Potential Amendments Concerning Use of Pseudonyms for Minors

        As indicated in the 2024 Report, in March 2024, the U.S. Department of Justice submitted
a suggestion to the Criminal Rules Advisory Committee proposing an amendment to Criminal
Rule 49.1 to require that all publicly available court filings refer to minors by pseudonyms rather
than by their initials. Since the 2024 Report, the Criminal Rules Advisory Committee formed a
subcommittee to study this suggestion with reference to amendments to Criminal Rule 49.1. This
issue also was incorporated into the scope of the project of the Standing Committee to coordinate
consideration of consistent privacy amendments in Civil Rule 5.2, Bankruptcy Rule 9037, and, if
needed, Appellate Rule 25 and Bankruptcy Rule 8011. At the spring 2026 meetings of the advisory
committees for Civil Rules, Criminal Rules, and Bankruptcy Rules, they reached consensus that
the change to require pseudonyms instead of initials was appropriate and voted to recommend
publication for public comment on this change to the privacy rules found in Civil Rule 5.2,
Criminal Rule 49.1, and Bankruptcy Rule 9037.

       As noted above, any changes made to these Rules will automatically flow through to the
courts of appeals. The Appellate Rules Advisory Committee is considering extending an
additional layer of protection for minors. At its April 2026 meeting, questions were raised about
how extending such an additional layer of protection to the identity of minors might interact with
the way in which minors were referred to in a state court record or even in the caption of the case.

                                                 5
Rules Appendix A - Page 6
Those concerns will be considered by the new subcommittee mentioned above. The Bankruptcy
Rules Committee will follow the work of the Appellate Rules Advisory Committee on this issue
to consider amendments to Bankruptcy Rule 8011.

        At its June 2026 meeting, the Standing Committee approved the recommendations of the
Civil, Criminal, and Bankruptcy Rules Advisory Committees, and the proposed privacy
amendments to Civil Rule 5.2, Criminal Rule 49.1, and Bankruptcy Rule 9037 on this issue are
slated for publication for public comment in August 2026.

       D. Amendments Concerning Applications to Proceed In Forma Pauperis in Appellate
          Cases

         The 2024 Report indicated that the Appellate Rules Advisory Committee was considering
suggestions to revise Appellate Form 4, which is an affidavit a party files to accompanying a
motion to proceed in an appeal in forma pauperis (IFP). The proposed amendments were intended
to substantially simplify the form while still providing the courts of appeals with enough financial
information and other details to decide whether to grant IFP status. The 2024 Report further noted
that at its April 2024 meeting, the Appellate Rules Advisory Committee recommended that these
proposed amendments be published for public comment. Since the 2024 Report, the proposed
amendments to Form 4 were published for public comment, and the amendments to Form 4 were
then approved by the Standing Committee in June 2025, the Judicial Conference of the United
States in September 2025, and the Supreme Court in April 2026. Amended Form 4 was submitted
to Congress on April 8, 2026. Absent action by Congress, amended Form 4 will go into effect on
December 1, 2026.

       E. Status of Other Proposals Identified in the 2024 Report

         As set forth in the 2024 Report, the Civil Rules Advisory Committee was considering
suggestions relating to the interaction between motions for protective orders filed in response to
discovery requests under Civil Rule 26 and motions to file documents under seal. Specifically,
the 2024 Report identified a September 2023 suggestion from the Lawyers for Civil Justice (LCJ)
for the comprehensive examination of the Civil Rules and to implement a framework for the court
and parties to protect privacy rights and prevent cybersecurity problems at various stages of civil
litigation, including discovery. Subsequently, LCJ narrowed its proposal in 2025 and suggested
amendments only to Civil Rules 26, 34, and 45 relating to documents produced in response to
discovery requests or subpoenas. These proposed amendments do not relate to the electronic filing
of court documents subject to the E-Government Act of 2002. The Civil Rules Advisory
Committee discussed that revised suggestion at its fall 2025 meeting and decided to monitor
developments in the area.




                                                 6
                                                                              Rules Appendix A - Page 7
         F. New Suggestions for Rules Amendments Related to Privacy Concerns

        Since the 2024 Report, the Standing Committee has not received any additional suggestions
for rules amendments related to privacy or security of information contained in electronically filed
public documents.

PART II. ONGOING IMPLEMENTATION EFFORTS TO PROTECT PRIVACY IN COURT FILINGS AND
        OPINIONS

        As mentioned above, the privacy rules require that the filer redact certain personal
identifiers from court filings. Additionally, due to the pervasive presence of sensitive personal
information in Social Security and immigration cases, the rules exempt filings in those matters
from the redaction requirement but also limit remote electronic access to those filings. The judicial
opinions in these cases, however, are widely available to the public through the U.S. Government
Publishing Office (GPO) United States Courts Opinions document repository on GovInfo and
often appear in internet search engine results. In 2020, the Judicial Conference Court
Administration and Case Management (CACM) Committee asked the AO to address this privacy
concern by developing a way for courts to suppress case name and party names in Social Security
and immigration opinions that are transferred to the GPO for inclusion on GovInfo. In response,
the AO developed a software tool called EasyFix. When implemented in the case management
system, EasyFix automatically replaces the case and party name metadata in Social Security and
immigration opinions with the word “Unavailable.”

        Additionally, in memoranda sent to judges and clerks of court in 2018 and 2023, the CACM
Committee recommended that courts consider adopting a practice to protect personal identifiers in
Social Security and immigration opinions by using only the first name and last initial of non-
government parties. 7 Following the release of the CACM Committee’s suggested practice, some
judges redact party names in their opinions and specifically cite the CACM Committee’s guidance
as support for this practice, particularly in Social Security cases. On the other hand, as discussed
in Section III, a recent FJC study has concluded that a large number of judicial opinions and related
documents do not redact party names, and only a small percentage of documents that redact party
names follow the CACM Committee’s suggested practice. Additionally, another FJC study has
revealed that a relatively small percentage of courts have redaction policies in place for Social
Security and immigration opinions.

        The CACM Committee is currently reassessing whether it should provide additional or
alternative guidance to assist the courts with protecting personal identifiers in Social Security and
immigration opinions. As part of this analysis, the CACM Committee has requested that the AO
conduct a legal analysis to ensure that its current guidance is consistent with case law regarding
public access to court proceedings. The Committee will then determine whether to take additional


         7
           The memoranda also urged the courts to continue or to consider initiating outreach efforts to
litigants and members of the bar to ensure they are aware of redaction requirements for court filings.

                                                   7
Rules Appendix A - Page 8
steps, including providing guidance to the courts or referring the issue to the appropriate Rules
Committees.

        Beyond reassessing its suggested practice in Social Security and immigration opinions, the
CACM Committee has also requested that the AO and FJC explore other ways to increase
awareness about ways to protect privacy in court filings and opinions. As noted in the 2024 Report,
the AO recently updated several sections of the judiciary’s internal and public websites to include
updated information regarding privacy rule requirements and suggested practices. Furthermore,
since the 2024 Report, the FJC has included information describing these requirements and
practices in its orientation materials for new chief judges, new court unit executives, and law
clerks.

        Additionally, in the current case management system before a filer electronically submits
a document to the court, the system presents a prominent reminder asking “have you redacted?”
Finally, as noted in the 2024 Report, the CACM Committee has urged the AO to implement
features in the modernized case management system to automate and facilitate a litigant’s review
of court filings for compliance with the redaction requirements in the Appellate, Bankruptcy, Civil,
and Criminal Rules.

PART III. FEDERAL JUDICIAL CENTER RESEARCH ON UNREDACTED PERSONAL INFORMATION

        As noted in prior reports on the adequacy of the privacy rules, between 2010 and 2024, the
FJC conducted several studies of compliance with the requirement to redact all but the last four
digits of an individual’s SSN. 8 Over the past two years, the FJC has conducted numerous
additional studies of unredacted personally identifiable information in court documents. These
FJC studies will inform the judiciary’s understanding of how best to protect sensitive information
in court filings and opinions.

        In November 2024, the FJC completed supplementary analyses of the 22,391 unredacted
SSNs identified in its April 2024 study to determine whether unredacted SSNs were more common
in particular types of court filings and proceedings. 9 Unredacted SSNs appeared more often in
certain types of cases. In the district courts, 88% of the SSNs appeared in cases on the civil docket.

        8
         See Memorandum from George Cort & Joe Cecil, Research Division, FJC, to the Privacy
Subcommittee of the Judicial Conference Committee on Rules of Practice and Procedure, Social Security
Numbers in Federal Court Documents (April 5, 2010); Joe S. Cecil et al., Unredacted Social Security
Numbers in Federal Court PACER Documents (October 2015) (finding less than .14 percent of sampled
documents included on or more unredacted SSNs); See Kristin A. Garri, et al., Unredacted Social Security
Numbers in Federal Court PACER Documents (April 2024); (finding that .10% of sampled documents
contained unredacted SSNs, that 22% of the unredacted SSNs appeared to be exempt from redaction
requirements and an additional 6% belonged to pro se parties who waived the privacy protections, and that
a large percentage of the unredacted SSNs occurred in a relatively small number of documents).

        See Kristin A. Garri, et al., Supplemental Analysis of Unredacted Social Security Numbers in
        9

Federal Court PACER Documents (November 2024).


                                                   8
                                                                                  Rules Appendix A - Page 9
Nearly a third of civil cases with unredacted SSNs were habeas corpus prisoner petitions and a
quarter were civil rights cases. A third of the criminal cases with unredacted SSNs were drug
offenses and slightly less than a quarter were property offenses, primarily fraud cases. These same
types of cases contained the most unredacted SSNs in civil and criminal appeals. Unredacted
SSNs in the bankruptcy case documents appeared most often in Chapter 7 and Chapter 13 filings,
and three-quarters of the SSNs in proof of claim registers appeared in Chapter 13 filings. Across
all court types, about a third of cases with documents containing unredacted SSNs involved at least
one pro se party. However, SSNs found within cases with pro se parties were much more likely
to be exempt from the redaction requirement or categorized as protections waived 10 compared to
the SSNs found within cases with represented parties. Unredacted SSNs largely appeared within
supporting materials that originate outside of the legal process and naturally contain sensitive
personal information. Supplementary financial documents, such as tax records, financial records,
bank statements, payroll records, and credit checks, accounted for about half of the documents
across all courts that contained unredacted SSNs.

        In November 2024, the FJC also completed a study on the prevalence of personally
identifiable information in Social Security and immigration opinions. 11 The FJC found, based on
a survey of district and circuit clerks and a review of court websites, that 27 district courts and one
circuit court have redaction policies for Social Security cases, and nine district courts and one
circuit court have redaction policies for immigration cases. To assess courts’ implementation of
the CACM Committee’s suggested practice of using only the first name and last initial of any non-
government parties, the FJC also analyzed a sample of 17,397 dispositive documents, i.e.,
opinions, orders, judgments, memoranda, and mandates in Social Security cases and 7,456
documents in immigration cases. For district court Social Security cases, over two-thirds of
sampled documents included completely unredacted non-government party names. In the court of
appeals, over 95 percent of the sampled documents filed in Social Security cases included
completely unredacted non-government party names. For district court civil immigration cases,
over 90 percent of the documents included completely unredacted non-government party names.
In the court of appeals, over 95 percent of the documents in civil, criminal, and agency-appealed
immigration cases included completely unredacted non-government party names.

        In March 2025, the FJC completed a report summarizing the local court rules of the district
and appellate courts to identify rules requiring redaction of specified private information from
court filings. 12 It also developed a report summarizing the local rules of bankruptcy courts that

          The privacy rules provide for exemptions from the redaction requirements in certain
         10

circumstances, which vary somewhat across the rule sets. Cf. Fed. R. Civ. P. 5.2(b); Fed. R. Crim. P.
49.1(b); Fed. R. Bankr. P. 9037(b). In addition, a person may waive the protection of the privacy rules with
respect to their own information by filing it without redaction. See, e.g., Fed. R. Civ. P. 5.2(h).

          See Jana Laks, et al., Redaction of Non-Government Party Names in Social Security and
         11

Immigration Case Documents (November 2024).

          See Marie Leary, Review of Local District and Appellate Rules Governing Redaction of Private
         12

Information in Federal Court Filings (March 2025).


                                                     9
Rules Appendix A - Page 10
require redaction of private information from court filings. 13 In January 2026, the FJC finalized
studies of unredacted minor names in court documents, 14 unredacted home addresses in criminal
filings in court documents, 15 and redaction of party names in reports and recommendations filed
in Social Security and immigration cases. 16

       For its analysis of unredacted minor names in federal court documents available on
PACER, the FJC searched a subset of the 4.7 million PACER documents used in its earlier studies
of unredacted SSNs. It determined that at least 0.13% of civil documents and 0.09% of appeals
documents contain the unredacted name of a person identified as a minor in some fashion.
Additionally, it found that about half of instances with an unredacted name appear to be
noncompliant with the privacy rules and about half appear to be exempt.

         For its analysis of the prevalence of unredacted home addresses in criminal and appellate
filings, the FJC randomly selected 10,000 documents from its collection of 41,326 criminal appeals
court PACER documents and 10,000 documents from its collection of 484,203 criminal district
court PACER documents to search for home addresses. In those data sets, it found unredacted
home addresses in 2.7% of the district court documents and 2.8% of the appeals court documents.
Looking at the small percentage of documents that contained an unredacted home address, the FJC
found that 63% of the unredacted home addresses in the district court documents and 78% of the
unredacted home addresses in the appeals court documents appeared to be noncompliant with the
privacy rules. Of the 32% of unredacted addresses (in district-court filings) that qualified as
exempt from the redaction requirement, almost all appeared in charging documents and affidavits,
arrest and search warrants, and criminal investigations or other documents prepared prior to filing
of a criminal charge. Of the 14% of unredacted addresses (in appellate filings) that were exempt
from the redaction requirement, about a third appeared in state court documents and the remainder
appeared in charging documents, affidavits, warrants, and investigations.

        Finally, for its study of redaction of party names in reports and recommendations (R&R’s)
in Social Security and immigration cases, the FJC analyzed the 955 publicly available R&Rs in
the 8,170 Social Security and 6,244 civil immigration cases which terminated in the district courts
between June 1, 2023, and December 31, 2023. It found that approximately two-thirds (65%, 587)
of the 908 R&Rs filed in Social Security cases contained the full non-government party name. Of

       13
          See Carly Giffin, Review of Local Bankruptcy Rules, Orders, and Procedures Governing
Redaction of Private Information in Federal Court Filings (March 2025).

       See Roy Germano, et al., Exploratory Analysis of Unredacted Minors’ Names in Federal Court
       14

PACER Documents (January 2026).

       See Roy Germano, et al., Exploratory Analysis of Unredacted Home Addresses in Federal Court
       15

PACER Criminal Proceedings Documents (January 2026).

       See Kristin A. Garri, et al., Redaction of Non-Government Party Names in Reports and
       16

Recommendations Filed in Social Security and Immigration Cases (January 2026).



                                                10
                                                                             Rules Appendix A - Page 11
the 35% that were redacted, nearly all (304, about 95%) included only the first name and last initial
of the non-government party, mirroring the CACM Committee’s suggested practice. Additionally,
over 80% (38) of the R&Rs filed in civil immigration cases contained the full non-government
party name. Five of the eight redacted R&Rs (10.6%) were redacted using initials and the other
three were redacted to the first name and last initial (6.4%).

PART IV: CONCLUSION

       In the two years since the Judicial Conference’s 2024 Report to Congress on the adequacy
of the privacy rules, the rules committees have considered several proposed rule changes that
include privacy-related issues. The Civil and Criminal Rules Advisory Committees are proceeding
through the Rules Enabling Act process with proposed amendments to require complete redaction
of SSNs, ITINs and other taxpayer identification numbers in criminal and civil case filings. The
Civil, Criminal, and Bankruptcy Rules Committees are also proceeding with proposed
amendments to require reference to minors by pseudonyms rather than initials. These proposed
amendments to the privacy rules will be published for public comment in August 2026.
Additionally, proposed final amendments to Bankruptcy Rule 2002 were also approved at the June
2026 Standing Committee meeting to eliminate reference to debtor SSNs and ITINs in notices
provided under this rule. These proposed final amendments will be considered by the Judicial
Conference at its September 2026 session.

         Regarding additional measures to protect privacy in public court filings, the CACM
Committee is currently reassessing whether it should provide additional or alternative guidance to
assist the courts with protecting personal identifiers in Social Security and immigration opinions.
The CACM Committee has also requested that the AO and FJC explore other ways to increase
awareness about ways to protect privacy in court filings and opinions, and the FJC has included
information describing these requirements and practices in its orientation materials for new chief
judges, new court unit executives, and law clerks.

        Finally, the FJC has engaged in numerous studies since the 2024 Report to identify the
incident of unredacted SSNs in court filings and opinions, including Social Security and
immigration cases, the incidence of unredacted names of minors; and the different approaches in
local rules to redaction. The FJC has also conducted a survey in support of the Bankruptcy Rules
Committees’ consideration of the use of SSNs in bankruptcy filings. These results of these efforts
have supported and informed the rule-making process and the work of the CACM Committee to
continue to find ways to improve the protection of private information in electronic court filings.




                                                 11
Rules Appendix A - Page 12
                                                       Agenda E-19 (Appendix B)
                                                                         Rules
                                                                September 2026




       PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE FEDERAL
          RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE 1


 1   Rule 15.    Review or Enforcement of an Agency Order—
 2               How Obtained; Intervention

 3                               *****

 4   (f)     Premature       Petition     or    Application.         This

 5           subdivision (f) applies if a party files a petition for

 6           review or an application to enforce after an agency

 7           announces or enters an otherwise reviewable order—

 8           but before the agency disposes of any petition for

 9           rehearing, reopening, or reconsideration that renders

10           the order nonreviewable as to that party. The

11           premature petition or application becomes effective

12           to seek review or enforcement of the order when the

13           agency disposes of the last such petition for

14           rehearing, reopening, or reconsideration. If a party

15           intends to challenge the disposition of a petition for


             1
               New material is underlined; matter to be omitted is
     lined through.




                                                                 Rules Appendix B - Page 1
                            2          FEDERAL RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE




                    16             rehearing, reopening, or reconsideration, the party

                    17             must file a new or amended petition for review or

                    18             application to enforce in compliance with this

                    19             Rule 15.

                    20                            Committee Note

                    21               Subdivision (f). Subdivision (f) is new. It is designed
                    22      to eliminate a procedural trap. Some circuits hold that
                    23      petitions for review of agency orders that have been rendered
                    24      nonreviewable by the filing of a petition for rehearing (or
                    25      similar petition) are “incurably premature,” meaning that
                    26      they do not ripen or become valid after the agency disposes
                    27      of the rehearing petition. See, e.g., Nat’l Ass’n of
                    28      Immigration Judges v. Fed. Labor Relations Auth., 77 F.4th
                    29      1132, 1139 (D.C. Cir. 2023); Aeromar, C. Por A. v. Dept. of
                    30      Transp., 767 F.2d 1491, 1493 (11th Cir. 1985) (relying on the
                    31      pre-1993 treatment of notices of appeal and applying the
                    32      “same principle” to review of agency action). In these
                    33      circuits, if a party aggrieved by an agency action does not
                    34      file a second timely petition for review after the petition for
                    35      rehearing is denied by the agency, that party will find itself
                    36      out of time: Its first petition for review will be dismissed as
                    37      premature, and the deadline for filing a second petition for
                    38      review will have passed. Subdivision (f) removes this trap.

                    39              It is modeled after Rule 4(a)(4)(B)(i), as amended in
                    40      1993, and is intended to align the treatment of premature
                    41      petitions for review of agency orders with the treatment of
                    42      premature notices of appeal. Recognizing that while review
                    43      of district court orders is generally case based, see Fed. R.
                    44      Civ. P. 54, review of administrative orders is generally party
                    45      based, subdivision (f) refers to an order that is made




Rules Appendix B - Page 2
     FEDERAL RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE                          3




46   “nonreviewable as to that party” by a petition for rehearing,
47   reopening, or reconsideration.

48           Subdivision (f) does not address whether or when the
49   filing of a petition for rehearing, reopening, or
50   reconsideration renders an agency order nonreviewable as to
51   a party. That is left to the wide variety of statutes,
52   regulations, and judicial decisions that govern agencies and
53   appeals from agency decisions. Nor does it encompass
54   circumstances when an agency order may be nonreviewable,
55   or a petition for review may be premature, for any reason
56   other than the pendency of a petition for rehearing,
57   reopening, or reconsideration—for example, when the
58   agency’s proceedings have not yet culminated in a judicially
59   reviewable order. See, e.g., Alabama Power Co. v. FCC, 311
60   F.3d 1357, 1366 (11th Cir. 2002). Rather, subdivision (f)
61   provides that when, under governing law, an agency order is
62   nonreviewable as to a particular party because of the filing
63   of a petition for rehearing, reopening, or reconsideration, a
64   premature petition for review or application to enforce that
65   order will be held in abeyance and become effective when
66   the agency disposes of the last such petition—that is, the last
67   petition that renders the order nonreviewable as to that party.

68           As with appeals in civil cases, see Rule
69   4(a)(4)(B)(ii), the premature petition becomes effective to
70   review the original decision, but a party intending to
71   challenge the disposition of a petition for rehearing,
72   reopening, or reconsideration must file a new or amended
73   petition for review or application to enforce.




                                                              Rules Appendix B - Page 3
                              PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE FEDERAL
                                 RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE 1


                     1      Rule 29.          Brief of an Amicus Curiae

                     2      (a)    During Initial Consideration of a Case on the

                     3             Merits.

                     4             (1)        Applicability. This Rule        29(a)    governs

                     5                        amicus curiae filings during a court’s initial

                     6                        consideration of a case on the merits.

                     7             (2)        Purpose; When Permitted. An amicus brief

                     8                        that brings to the court’s attention relevant

                     9                        matter not already brought to its attention by

                    10                        the parties may help the court. An amicus

                    11                        brief that does not serve this purpose burdens

                    12                        the court, and its filing is disfavored. The

                    13                        United States or, its officer or agency, or a

                    14                        state may file an amicus brief without the




                                   1
                                       New material is underlined; matter to be omitted is lined
                            through.




Rules Appendix B - Page 4
     2         FEDERAL RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE




15                consent of the parties or leave of court. Any

16                other amicus curiae may file a brief only by

17                leave of court or if the brief states that all

18                parties have consented to its filing, but a court

19                of appeals. The court may prohibit the filing

20                of or may strike an amicus brief that would

21                result in a judge’s disqualification.

22       (3)      Motion for Leave to File. A The motion for

23                leave to file must be accompanied by the

24                proposed brief and state:

25                (A)     the movant’s interest; and

26                (B)     the reason why an amicus the brief is

27                        desirable and why serves the purpose

28                        set forth in Rule 29(a)(2) the matters

29                        asserted are relevant to the disposition

30                        of the case.

31       (4)      Contents and Form. An amicus brief must

32                comply with Rule 32. In addition to the




                                                             Rules Appendix B - Page 5
                            FEDERAL RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE                     3




                    33                requirements of Rule 32, Tthe cover must

                    34                identify name the party or parties supported

                    35                and indicate whether the brief supports

                    36                affirmance or reversal. An amicus The brief

                    37                need not comply with Rule 28, but it must

                    38                include the following:

                    39                (A)    if the amicus curiae is a corporation,

                    40                       a disclosure statement like that

                    41                       required of parties by Rule 26.1;

                    42                (B)    unless the amicus is the United States,

                    43                       its officer or agency, or a state, the

                    44                       disclosure statement required by

                    45                       Rules 29(b) and (d);

                    46                (B)(C) a table of contents, with page

                    47                       references;

                    48                (C)(D) a     table     of      authorities—cases

                    49                       (alphabetically arranged), statutes,

                    50                       and     other        authorities,   —with




Rules Appendix B - Page 6
     4   FEDERAL RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE




51                 references to together with the pages

52                 of the brief where they are cited;

53          (D)(E) a concise statement description of the

54                 identity, history, experience, and

55                 interests of the amicus curiae, its

56                 interest in the case, and the source of

57                 its authority to file together with an

58                 explanation of how the brief and the

59                 perspective of the amicus will help

60                 the court;

61          (F)    if an amicus has existed for less than

62                 12 months, the date the amicus was

63                 created;

64          (E)    unless the amicus is one listed in the

65                 first sentence of Rule 29(a)(2), a

66                 statement that indicates whether:

67                 (i)     a party’s counsel authored the

68                         brief in whole or in part;




                                                        Rules Appendix B - Page 7
                            FEDERAL RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE                  5




                    69                      (ii)    a party or a party’s counsel

                    70                              contributed money that was

                    71                              intended to fund preparing or

                    72                              submitting the brief; and

                    73                      (iii)   a person—other than the

                    74                              amicus curiae, its members, or

                    75                              its      counsel—contributed

                    76                              money that was intended to

                    77                              fund preparing or submitting

                    78                              the brief and, if so, identifies

                    79                              each such person;

                    80                (F)(G) an argument, which may be preceded

                    81                      by a summary and which but need not

                    82                      include a statement of the applicable

                    83                      standard of review; and

                    84                (G)(H) a certificate of compliance under

                    85                      Rule 32(g)(1), if length is computed

                    86                      using a word or line limit.




Rules Appendix B - Page 8
      6         FEDERAL RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE




 87       (5)      Length. Except        by   with   the    court’s

 88                permission, an amicus brief must not exceed

 89                6,500 words may be no more than one-half

 90                the maximum length authorized by these

 91                rules for a party’s principal brief. If the court

 92                grants a party permission to file a longer

 93                brief, that extension does not affect the length

 94                of an amicus brief.

 95       (6)      Time for Filing. An amicus curiae must file

 96                its brief, accompanied by a motion for filing

 97                when necessary, no later than 7 days after the

 98                principal brief of the party being supported is

 99                filed. An amicus curiae that does not support

100                either party must file its brief no later than 7

101                days after the appellant’s or petitioner’s

102                principal brief is filed. The A court may grant

103                leave for later filing, specifying the time

104                within which an opposing party may answer.




                                                              Rules Appendix B - Page 9
                             FEDERAL RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE                       7




                  105              (7)    Reply Brief. An amicus may not file a reply

                  106                     brief except with the court’s permission.

                  107                     Except by the court’s permission, an amicus

                  108                     curiae may not file a reply brief.

                  109              (8)    Oral Argument. An amicus curiae may

                  110                     participate in oral argument only with the

                  111                     court’s permission.

                  112        (b)   Disclosing a Relationship Between an Amicus and

                  113              a Party. An amicus brief must:

                  114              (1)    disclose whether:

                  115                     (A)    a party or its counsel authored the

                  116                            brief in whole or in part;

                  117                     (B)    a party or its counsel contributed or

                  118                            pledged to contribute money intended

                  119                            to pay for preparing, drafting, or

                  120                            submitting the brief; and

                  121                     (C)    a    party,    its   counsel,   or   any

                  122                            combination of parties, their counsel,




Rules Appendix B - Page 10
      8           FEDERAL RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE




123                          or both has a majority ownership

124                          interest in or majority control of a

125                          legal entity submitting the brief; and

126         (2)      if so, name the party or counsel.

127   (c)   Disclosure by the Party or Counsel. If the party or

128         counsel knows that an amicus has failed to make the

129         Rule 29(b) disclosure, the party or counsel must do

130         so.

131   (d)   Disclosing a Relationship Between an Amicus and

132         a Nonparty. An amicus brief must disclose whether

133         any person contributed or pledged to contribute more

134         than $100 intended to pay for preparing, drafting, or

135         submitting the brief and, if so, must name each such

136         person. But disclosure is not required if the person is:

137                     the amicus;

138                     its counsel; or

139                     a member of the amicus.




                                                             Rules Appendix B - Page 11
                             FEDERAL RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE                    9




                  140        (b)(e) During Consideration of Whether to Grant

                  141             Rehearing.

                  142             (1)   Applicability. This Rule 29(b) Rules 29(a)-

                  143                   (d) governs amicus filings briefs filed during

                  144                   a court’s consideration of whether to grant

                  145                   panel rehearing or rehearing en banc, except

                  146                   as provided in this Rule 29(e), and unless a

                  147                   local rule or order in a case provides

                  148                   otherwise.

                  149             (2)   When Permitted. The United States, or its

                  150                   officer or agency, or a state may file an

                  151                   amicus brief without the consent of the

                  152                   parties or leave of court. Any other amicus

                  153                   curiae may file a brief only by leave of court.

                  154                   The motion for leave must comply with Rule

                  155                   29(a)(3).

                  156             (3)   Motion for Leave to File. Rule 29(a)(3)

                  157                   applies to a motion for leave.




Rules Appendix B - Page 12
      10           FEDERAL RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE




158          (4)      Contents, Form, and Length. Rule 29(a)(4)

159                   applies to the amicus brief. An amicus The

160                   brief must not exceed 2,600 words.

161          (5)(4) Time      for    Filing. An    amicus    curiae

162                   supporting the a petition for rehearing or

163                   supporting neither party must file its brief,

164                   accompanied by a motion for filing when

165                   necessary, no later than 7 days after the

166                   petition is filed. An amicus curiae opposing

167                   the petition must file its brief, accompanied

168                   by a motion for filing when necessary, no

169                   later than the date set by the court for the a

170                   response.

171                         Committee Note

172          The amendments to Rule 29 make changes to the
173   procedure for filing amicus briefs, including to the
174   disclosure requirements.
175          The amendments seek primarily to provide the courts
176   and the public with more information about an amicus
177   curiae. Throughout its consideration of possible
178   amendments, the Advisory Committee has carefully
179   considered the relevant First Amendment interests.




                                                             Rules Appendix B - Page 13
                             FEDERAL RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE                           11




                  180                Some have suggested that information about an
                  181        amicus is unnecessary because the only thing that matters
                  182        about an amicus brief is the merits of the legal arguments in
                  183        that brief. At times, however, courts do consider the identity
                  184        and perspective of an amicus to be relevant. For that reason,
                  185        the Committee thinks that some disclosures about an amicus
                  186        are important to promote the integrity of court processes and
                  187        rules.

                  188                Careful attention to the various interests and the need
                  189        to avoid unjustified burdens is reflected throughout these
                  190        amendments. For example, the amendment treats disclosures
                  191        about the relationship between a party and an amicus
                  192        differently than disclosures about the relationship between a
                  193        nonparty and an amicus. While the public interest in
                  194        knowing about an amicus—in order to evaluate its
                  195        arguments and a court’s consideration of those arguments—
                  196        is relevant in both situations, there is an additional interest in
                  197        disclosing the relationship between a party and an amicus:
                  198        the court’s interest in evaluating whether an amicus is
                  199        serving as a mouthpiece for a party, thereby evading limits
                  200        imposed on parties in our adversary system and misleading
                  201        the court about the independence of an amicus. Moreover,
                  202        the burden on an amicus of disclosing a relationship with a
                  203        party is much lower than having to disclose a relationship
                  204        with nonparties. Disclosing a relationship with a party
                  205        requires an amicus to check its records (and perhaps make a
                  206        disclosure) regarding only the limited number of persons
                  207        who are parties to the case. Disclosing a relationship with a
                  208        nonparty would, by contrast, require an amicus to check its
                  209        records (and perhaps make a disclosure) regarding the much
                  210        larger universe of all persons who are not parties to the case.

                  211                To take another example, the amendment treats
                  212        contributions by a nonparty that are earmarked for a
                  213        particular brief differently than general contributions by a




Rules Appendix B - Page 14
      12         FEDERAL RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE




214   nonparty to an amicus. People may make contributions to
215   organizations for a host of reasons, including reasons that
216   have nothing to do with filing amicus briefs. Requiring the
217   disclosure of non-earmarked contributions provides less
218   useful information for those who seek to evaluate a brief and
219   imposes far greater burdens on contributors.

220           Subdivision (a). The amendment to Rule 29(a)(2)
221   adds a statement of the purpose of an amicus brief: to bring
222   to the court’s attention relevant matter not already brought
223   to its attention by the parties that may help the court. By
224   contrast, if an amicus curiae brief adds nothing to the parties’
225   briefs, it is a burden rather than a help. Where feasible,
226   avoiding redundancy among amicus briefs can also be
227   helpful.

228            The amendment to Rule 29(a)(4) expands the
229   required statement regarding the identity of an amicus and
230   its interest in the case and requires “a concise description of
231   the identity, history, experience, and interests of the amicus,
232   together with an explanation of how the brief and the
233   perspective of the amicus will help the court.” The
234   amendment calls for this broader disclosure to help the court
235   and the public evaluate the likely reliability and helpfulness
236   of an amicus, particularly those with anodyne or potentially
237   misleading names. It also requires that the amicus explain
238   how the brief and the perspective of the amicus will further
239   the goal of helping the court. Rule 29(a)(4)(F) is new. It
240   requires an amicus that has existed for less than 12 months
241   to state the date of its creation, helping identify amici that
242   may have been created for the purpose of this litigation.
243   Subsequent provisions are re-lettered.

244           Existing disclosure requirements about the
245   relationship between the amicus and both parties and
246   nonparties are removed from subdivision (a) and placed in




                                                               Rules Appendix B - Page 15
                             FEDERAL RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE                         13




                  247        separate subdivisions, one dealing with parties (subdivision
                  248        (b)) and one dealing with nonparties (subdivision (d)).

                  249                 Rule 29(a)(5) is amended to directly impose a word
                  250        limit on amicus briefs, replacing the provision that
                  251        establishes length limits for amicus briefs as a fraction of the
                  252        length limits for parties. This results in removing the option
                  253        to rely on a page count rather than a word count. This change
                  254        enables Rule 29(a)(4)(H) (formerly 29(a)(4)(G)) to be
                  255        simplified and require a certification of compliance under
                  256        Rule 32(g)(1) in all amicus briefs.

                  257                Subdivision (b). Subdivision (b) dealing with
                  258        disclosure of the relationship between the amicus and a party
                  259        is new, but it draws on existing Rule 29(a)(4)(E). Because of
                  260        the important interest in knowing whether a party has
                  261        significant influence or control of an amicus, these
                  262        disclosures are more far reaching than those involving
                  263        nonparties, which are addressed in (d).

                  264                Rule 29(b)(1)(A) carries forward the existing
                  265        requirement that authorship of an amicus brief by a party or
                  266        its counsel must be disclosed.

                  267                Rule 29(b)(1)(B) carries forward the existing
                  268        requirement that money contributed by a party or party’s
                  269        counsel that was intended to fund the preparation or
                  270        submission of the brief must be disclosed. But in an effort to
                  271        counteract the possibility of an amicus interpreting the
                  272        existing rule narrowly, the amendment explicitly refers to
                  273        “preparing, drafting, or submitting the brief,” thereby
                  274        making clear that it applies to every stage of the process.

                  275               Subdivision (b)(1)(C) is new. It requires disclosure
                  276        of whether a party, its counsel, or any combination of parties
                  277        or counsel either has a majority ownership interest in or
                  278        majority control of an amicus. If a party has such control




Rules Appendix B - Page 16
      14         FEDERAL RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE




279   over an amicus, it is in a position to control the content of an
280   amicus brief. If undisclosed, the court and the public may be
281   misled about the independence of an amicus from a party,
282   and a party may be able to effectively exceed the limitations
283   otherwise imposed on parties.

284          Subdivision (b)(2) requires that any disclosure
285   required by subdivision (b)(1) name the party or counsel.
286   This builds upon the requirement in current Rule
287   29(a)(4)(E)(iii) that certain persons who make earmarked
288   contributions be identified.

289          Subdivision (c). Subdivision (c) is new. It operates
290   as a backstop to the disclosure requirements of (b): If the
291   amicus fails to make a required disclosure, and the party or
292   counsel knows it, the party or counsel must make the
293   disclosure.

294           Subdivision (d). Subdivision (d) focuses on the
295   relationship between the amicus and a nonparty. It makes
296   several changes to the existing Rule 29(a)(4)(E)(iii), which
297   currently requires the disclosure of any contribution
298   earmarked for a brief, no matter how small, by anyone other
299   than the amicus itself, its members, or its counsel.
300   Earmarked contributions run the risk that the amicus is being
301   used as a paid mouthpiece by the contributor. Knowing
302   about earmarked contributions helps courts and the public
303   evaluate the arguments and information in the amicus brief
304   by providing information about possible reasons for the
305   filing other than those explained by the amicus itself.

306          The Committee considered requiring the disclosure
307   of nonparties who make any significant contributions to an
308   amicus, whether earmarked or not. But it decided against
309   doing so because of the burdens it could impose on amici
310   and their contributors, even when the reason for the
311   contribution had nothing to do with the brief. Instead, it




                                                               Rules Appendix B - Page 17
                             FEDERAL RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE                       15




                  312        retained the focus of the existing rule on earmarked
                  313        contributions.

                  314               The Committee considered eliminating the member
                  315        exception because that exception allows for easy evasion:
                  316        simply become a member at the time of making an
                  317        earmarked contribution. But it decided against doing so
                  318        because members speak through an amicus and an amicus
                  319        generally speaks for its members. In addition, eliminating
                  320        the member exception threatened to place an unfair burden
                  321        on amici who do not budget in advance for amicus briefs
                  322        (and therefore have to “pass the hat” when the need to file
                  323        an amicus brief arises) compared to other amici who may file
                  324        amicus briefs more frequently (and therefore can budget in
                  325        advance and fund them from general revenue). Without a
                  326        member exception, the latter (generally larger) amici would
                  327        not have to disclose, but the former (generally smaller) amici
                  328        would have to disclose.

                  329                Rather than eliminate the member exception for
                  330        organizations, the amendment protects members from
                  331        disclosure. But Rule 29(a)(4)(F) requires an amicus that has
                  332        existed for less than 12 months to disclose the date of its
                  333        creation. This requirement works in conjunction with the
                  334        expanded disclosure requirement of Rule 29(a)(4)(E) to
                  335        reveal an amicus that may have been created for purposes of
                  336        particular litigation or is less established and broadly-based
                  337        than its name might suggest. Unless adequately explained, a
                  338        court and the public might choose to discount the views of
                  339        such an amicus.

                  340                The amendment also provides a $100 threshold for
                  341        the disclosure requirement. Under the existing rule, a non-
                  342        member of an amicus who contributes any amount, no matter
                  343        how small, that is earmarked for a particular brief must be
                  344        disclosed. This can hamper crowdfunding of amicus briefs




Rules Appendix B - Page 18
      16         FEDERAL RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE




345   while providing little useful information to the courts or the
346   public. Contributions of $100 or less are unlikely to run the
347   risk that an amicus is being used as a mouthpiece for others.

348           Subdivision (e). Subdivision (e) retains most of the
349   content of existing subdivision (b) and governs amicus briefs
350   at the rehearing stage. It is revised to largely incorporate by
351   reference the provision applicable to amicus briefs at the
352   initial consideration of the case. Rule 29(e)(1) makes
353   Rule 29(a) through (d) applicable, except as provided in the
354   rest of Rule 29(e) or if a local rule or order in a particular
355   case provides otherwise. As a result, duplicative provisions
356   are eliminated.




                                                              Rules Appendix B - Page 19
                               PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE FEDERAL
                                  RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE 1


                     1       Rule 32.         Form of Briefs, Appendices, and Other
                     2                        Papers

                     3                                        *****

                     4       (g)    Certificate of Compliance.

                     5              (1)       Briefs and Papers That Require a

                     6                        Certificate. A brief submitted under Rules

                     7                        28.1(e)(2), 29(a)(5), 29(e)(3) 29(b)(4), or

                     8                        32(a)(7)(B)—and a paper submitted under

                     9                        Rules      5(c)(1),    21(d)(1),     27(d)(2)(A),

                   10                         27(d)(2)(C), or 40(d)(3)(A)—must include a

                   11                         certificate    by     the    attorney,    or    an

                   12                         unrepresented party, that the document

                   13                         complies with the type-volume limitation.

                   14                         The person preparing the certificate may rely



                                    1
                                        New material is underlined; matter to be omitted is lined
                             through.




Rules Appendix B - Page 20
     2            FEDERAL RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE




15                   on the word or line count of the word-

16                   processing system used to prepare the

17                   document. The certificate must state the

18                   number of words—or the number of lines of

19                   monospaced type—in the document.

20          (2)      Acceptable Form. Form 6 in the Appendix

21                   of Forms meets the requirements for a

22                   certificate of compliance.

23                         Committee Note

24        Rule 32(g) is amended for style and to conform to
25   amendments to Rule 29.




                                                        Rules Appendix B - Page 21
                                               Appendix:
                                       Length Limits Stated in the
                                  Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure1

This chart summarizes the length limits stated in the Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure.
Please refer to the rules for precise requirements, and bear in mind the following:

                                                    *****

    o For the limits in Rules 28.1, 29(a)(5), and 32:

               -     You may use the word limit or page limit, regardless of how you produce the
                     document; or

               -     You may use the line limit if you type or print your document with a monospaced
                     typeface. A typeface is monospaced when each character occupies the same
                     amount of horizontal space.

                   Rule           Document type                 Word limit Page limit           Line limit

                                                    *****

 Amicus            29(a)(5)       o Amicus brief during         One-half          One-half      One-half the
 briefs                             initial consideration       the length        the length    length set
                                    of case on merits           set by the        set by the    by the
                                                                Appellate         Appellate     Appellate
                                                                Rules for a       Rules for a   Rules for a
                                                                party’s           party’s       party’s
                                                                principal         principal     principal
                                                                brief             brief         brief

                                                                6,500             Not           Not
                                                                                  applicable    applicable

                   29(b)(4)(e)(3) o Amicus brief during         2,600             Not           Not
                                    consideration of                              applicable    applicable
                                    whether to grant
                                    rehearing

                                                    *****




         1
             New material is underlined; matter to be omitted is lined through.



Rules Appendix B - Page 22
             Excerpt from the May 11, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Appellate Rules


                        COMMITTEE ON RULES OF PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
                                                    OF THE
                            JUDICIAL CONFERENCE OF THE UNITED STATES
                                      WASHINGTON, D.C. 20544

JAMES C. DEVER III                                                                CHAIRS OF ADVISORY COMMITTEES
     CHAIR
                                                                                            ALLISON H. EID
CAROLYN A. DUBAY                                                                           APPELLATE RULES
   SECRETARY
                                                                                        REBECCA B. CONNELLY
                                                                                         BANKRUPTCY RULES

                                                                                            SARAH S. VANCE
                                                                                              CIVIL RULES

                                                                                         MICHAEL W. MOSMAN
                                                                                           CRIMINAL RULES

                                                                                           JESSE M. FURMAN
                                                                                            EVIDENCE RULES



                                          MEMORANDUM*

    TO:          Hon. James C. Dever III, Chair
                 Committee on Rules of Practice and Procedure

    FROM: Hon. Allison H. Eid, Chair
          Advisory Committee on Appellate Rules

    RE:          Report of the Advisory Committee on Appellate Rules

    DATE:        May 11, 2026


    I.       Introduction

          The Advisory Committee on Appellate Rules met on Thursday, April 16, 2026,
    in Charlotte, North Carolina. * * *

             The Advisory Committee has several action items for the June 2026 meeting.

             It seeks final approval (per Part II of this report) of:



         *
         A copy of the full committee report can be found in the June 2026 Standing Committee agenda book
    publicly available on www.uscourts.gov.



                                                                                  Rules Appendix B - Page 23
        Excerpt from the May 11, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Appellate Rules


             amendments to Rule 29 concerning amicus briefs, along with conforming
              amendments to Rule 32 and the Appendix of Length Limits; and

             amendments to Rule 15, concerning premature petitions for review or en-
              forcement of agency orders.

                                            *****

II.      Items for Final Approval

         A.       Amicus Briefs—Rules 29 and 32 and Appendix of Length Limits
                  (21-AP-C)

      For several years the Advisory Committee has been considering revisions to
Rule 29’s amicus disclosure requirements.

       In September 2025, the Judicial Conference sent to the Supreme Court a pack-
age of proposed amendments to Rule 29, together with conforming amendments to
Rule 32 and the Appendix of Length Limits. In response to concerns raised by the
Executive Committee of the Judicial Conference, as well as two other ambiguities or
errors identified in the proposed amendments, the Advisory Committee and the
Standing Committee voted to withdraw the amendment package, following the course
pursued in addressing a similar issue in 2018. See Agenda Book 166 (Apr. 2026), re-
printing Letter from Judge James C. Dever III & Judge Allison H. Eid to Scott S.
Harris, Clerk of Court, Supreme Court of the United States (Mar. 10, 2026).

       The Court chose not to forward to Congress this spring the relevant portions
of the amendment package. The Advisory Committee discussed the proposals again
at its April meeting, concentrating on three substantive issues and one issue of pro-
cedure.

                  1. New-Member Disclosures

       The Executive Committee’s concerns focused on a requirement that an organ-
izational amicus disclose certain members who have contributed to funding its ami-
cus brief. Under the current Rule 29, an amicus must disclose whether “a person—
other than the amicus curiae, its members, or its counsel—contributed money that
was intended to fund preparing or submitting the brief” and, if so, must “identif[y]
each such person” (emphasis added). The previously proposed amendments would
have recodified this requirement in Rule 29(e)(1), limited it to contributions or
pledges over $100, and exempted only “the amicus,” “its counsel,” or “a member of the
amicus who first became a member at least 12 months earlier”: in other words, re-
quiring that over-$100 contributions or pledges from members of less than one year’s
standing be disclosed. Another provision, Rule 29(e)(2), would have required that “[i]f
an amicus has existed for less than 12 months, an amicus brief need not disclose
contributing members but must disclose the date the amicus was created.” (This date-



Rules Appendix B - Page 24
      Excerpt from the May 11, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Appellate Rules


of-creation disclosure would also be required by the proposed Rule 29(a)(4)(F), which
states that an amicus brief must include, “if an amicus has existed for less than 12
months, the date the amicus was created.”)

       The proposed Committee Note had described the provision as an anti-evasion
rule, treating new members of an amicus as if they were nonmembers. The cost of
such an anti-evasion rule, however, is that an organizational amicus would have to
disclose the identities of its contributing new members, which might dissuade either
the organization or its new members from participating in filing the brief in the first
place. See NAACP v. Alabama, 357 U.S. 449, 462 (1958) (describing the potential
chilling effect of membership disclosures); Ams. for Prosperity Found. v. Bonta, 594
U.S. 595, 606 (2021) (same); see also First Choice Women’s Res. Ctrs. v. Davenport, —
U.S. —, 2026 WL 1153029, at *8 (Apr. 29, 2026) (same).

       At its April meeting, the Advisory Committee again considered the new-mem-
ber disclosure issue, which had previously been the subject of very extensive discus-
sion and public comment. Its consideration included discussion of the extent of the
negative reaction to the proposal from the Executive Committee and the public, as
well as the unclear extent of the problem it sought to fix. The Advisory Committee
voted 5-1, with one abstention, to remove the requirement of new-member contribu-
tion disclosure from the proposal, as shown:

      (1)    An amicus brief must disclose whether any person contributed or
             pledged to contribute more than $100 intended to pay for preparing,
             drafting, or submitting the brief and, if so, must identify each such per-
             son. But disclosure is not required if the person is:

             •      the amicus;

             •      its counsel; or

             •      a member of the amicus who first became a member at least 12
                    months earlier.

      (2)    If an amicus has existed for less than 12 months, an amicus brief need
             not disclose contributing members but must disclose the date the amicus
             was created.

   (A complete copy of the proposed amendments to Rule 29 is attached to this re-
port.)

             2. Backup Disclosure Requirements

   After the amendment package was submitted to the Court, a potential source of
ambiguity was identified with regard to certain backup disclosure requirements. The
proposed amendments would have required that an amicus disclose certain types of



                                                                        Rules Appendix B - Page 25
        Excerpt from the May 11, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Appellate Rules


involvement by a party or its counsel; that “[a]ny such disclosure must name the party
or counsel”; and that, “[i]f the party or counsel knows that an amicus has failed to
make the required disclosure, the party or counsel must do so.”

    While the proposed Committee Note anticipated that these references to “such
disclosure” or “the required disclosure” only concerned disclosures of a party or coun-
sel’s involvement, they might also be thought to be ambiguous. Arguably if a party or
counsel knows that an amicus has failed to make a different “required disclosure,”
such as a disclosure of nonmember contributions discussed above, the rule might be
read to require the party or counsel to disclose that fact to the court.

    After discussing the issue, the Advisory Committee concluded that the narrower
interpretation already presupposed by the Committee Note was to be preferred. After
considering the advice of the style consultants, the Committee voted without dissent
to avoid any ambiguity in “such” by merging the proposed subdivisions (b) and (c) of
Rule 29, as well as to avoid any ambiguity in “the required disclosure” by referring
more specifically to “the Rule 29(b) disclosure,” as shown:

         (b)      Disclosing a Relationship Between an Amicus and a Party. An
                  amicus brief must:

                  (1)        disclose whether:

                             (1)(A) a party or its counsel authored the brief in whole or in part;

                             (2)(B) a party or its counsel contributed or pledged to contribute
                                    money intended to pay for preparing, drafting, or submit-
                                    ting the brief; and

                             (3)(C) a party, its counsel, or any combination of parties, their
                                    counsel, or both has a majority ownership interest in or ma-
                                    jority control of a legal entity submitting the brief; and

                  (2)        if so, name the party or counsel.

         (c)      Naming the Party or Counsel. Any such disclosure must name the
                  party or counsel.

         (d)(c) Disclosure by the Party or Counsel. If the party or counsel knows
                that an amicus has failed to make the required Rule 29(b) disclosure,
                the party or counsel must do so.

    (Again, a complete copy of the proposal is attached to this report.)




Rules Appendix B - Page 26
      Excerpt from the May 11, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Appellate Rules


             3. Appendix of Length Limits

          An erroneous cross-reference to Rule 29(a)(5) had not been removed from
the proposed Appendix of Length Limits before the amendment package was submit-
ted to the Court. The Advisory Committee voted without dissent to adopt a new ver-
sion of the Appendix that removed this erroneous cross-reference, along with an un-
necessary ellipsis that had been inserted as well. (These changes are not further de-
tailed here but can be seen in the attachment to this report.)

             4. Republication

          The Advisory Committee also considered whether to submit these revisions
for an additional round of public comment. While two of the issues above are stylistic
or technical in nature, the first is not. However, the issue of new-member disclosure
had been exhaustively discussed by the Advisory Committee and had already been
the subject of many public comments.

       After considering the issue, the Advisory Committee voted without dissent to
recommend that the Standing Committee give final approval without republication
to revised versions of the proposed amendments to Rule 29, Rule 32, and the Appen-
dix of Length Limits.

       (In preparing the revised versions for the Standing Committee’s review, three
additional style corrections were made on the advice of the style consultants. First, a
previously proposed alteration of the phrase “by leave of court” to “with leave of court”
in the proposed Rule 29(a)(2) was reversed: “by leave of court” is the more common
phrase and is also used in the proposed Rule 29(e)(2). Second, the requirement to
“identify” contributors in the proposed Rule 29(d) was changed to a requirement to
“name” contributors, consistently with the proposed Rule 29(a)(4). Third, two errone-
ous instances of the word “Rules” in Rule 32(g) were corrected to “Rule.” Corrected
versions of the proposed amendments accompany this report.)

      B.     Premature Petitions (24-AP-G)

     In June 2025, the Standing Committee approved publication of a proposed
amendment to remove a potential trap for the unwary in Rule 15.

       The “incurably premature” doctrine holds that if a petition to rehear or recon-
sider an agency decision makes that decision nonreviewable in a court of appeals,
then a petition to review or to enforce that agency decision must be dismissed, and a
new petition for review must be filed after the agency disposes of the rehearing peti-
tion. Rule 4, concerning appeals from district court judgments, used to operate in a
similar way with respect to various postjudgment motions. But in 1993, Rule 4 was
amended to provide that such a premature notice of appeal becomes effective when
the postjudgment motion is decided. The proposal is to do for Rule 15 what was done
for Rule 4.



                                                                        Rules Appendix B - Page 27
        Excerpt from the May 11, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Appellate Rules


     Three public comments were received, all of them broadly supportive of the
changes and conveying no specific concerns.

      The Advisory Committee made two changes after publication. First, it renum-
bered the subdivision created by the proposed amendment from 15(d) to 15(f), in the
hopes of avoiding confusion among courts and litigants regarding the proposed rule
and the current Rule 15(d), often discussed by courts with regard to intervention in
agency review proceedings. Second, to avoid attempts to obtain review of orders that
are nonfinal for other reasons (unrelated to any pending petition for rehearing or
reconsideration), the Advisory Committee added language reaffirming that the order
in question must be “otherwise reviewable,” as shown:

         (d)(f) Premature Petition or Application. This subdivision (d)(f) applies if
                a party files a petition for review or an application to enforce after an
                agency announces or enters its an otherwise reviewable order—but be-
                fore the agency disposes of any petition for rehearing, reopening, or re-
                consideration that renders the order nonreviewable as to that party. The
                premature petition or application be-comes effective to seek review or
                enforcement of the order when the agency disposes of the last such peti-
                tion for rehearing, reopening, or reconsideration. If a party intends to
                challenge the disposition of a petition for rehearing, reopening, or recon-
                sideration, the party must file a new or amended petition for review or
                application to enforce in compliance with this Rule 15.

      The Advisory Committee voted without dissent to recommend that the Stand-
ing Committee give final approval to the revised version of the proposed amendment
to Rule 15 that accompanies this report.

                                            *****




Rules Appendix B - Page 28
                                                                 Agenda E-19 (Appendix C)
                                                                                   Rules
                                                                          September 2026




       PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE FEDERAL
         RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE1


 1   Rule 2002. Notices

 2                                      *****

 3   (o)        Caption. The caption of a notice given under this

 4              Rule 2002 must conform to Rule 1005 include the

 5              information that Form 416B requires. The caption of

 6              a debtor’s notice to a creditor must also include the

 7              information that § 342(c) requires.

 8                                      *****

 9                                 Committee Note

10           The amendment to Rule 2002(o) eliminates the
11   requirement that all notices given under Rule 2002 include
12   the caption required for the bankruptcy petition under
13   Rule 1005. That caption requires, among other things, the
14   debtor’s employer-identification number, last four digits of
15   the debtor’s social security number or individual debtor’s
16   taxpayer-identification number, any other federal taxpayer-
17   identification number, and all other names used within eight
18   years before filing the petition. Instead, most Rule 2002
19   notices may use the caption described in Official
20   Form 416B, which requires only the court’s name, the name

                1
                    New material is underlined; matter to be omitted is lined
     through.




                                                                           Rules Appendix C - Page 1
                            2       FEDERAL RULES OF BANKRUPTCY PROCEDURE




                    21      of the debtor, the case number, the chapter under which the
                    22      case was filed, and a brief description of the document’s
                    23      character. Rule 2002 notices sent by the debtor must also
                    24      include the information that § 342(c) of the Code requires.
                    25      The notice of the meeting of creditors, Rule 2002(a)(1), will
                    26      continue to include all information required by Official
                    27      Forms 309(A-I).




Rules Appendix C - Page 2
      Fill in this information to identify your case:

      United States Bankruptcy Court for the:


      ____________________ District of _________________
                                            (State)
      Case number (If known): _________________________ Chapter you are filing under:
                                                               Chapter 7                                                   Check if this is an
                                                               Chapter 11
                                                               Chapter 12                                                    amended filing
                                                               Chapter 13




Official Form 101
Voluntary Petition for Individuals Filing for Bankruptcy                                                                                       12/26

The bankruptcy forms use you and Debtor 1 to refer to a debtor filing alone. A married couple may file a bankruptcy case together—called a
joint case—and in joint cases, these forms use you to ask for information from both debtors. For example, if a form asks, “Do you own a car,”
the answer would be yes if either debtor owns a car. When information is needed about the spouses separately, the form uses Debtor 1 and
Debtor 2 to distinguish between them. In joint cases, one of the spouses must report information as Debtor 1 and the other as Debtor 2. The
same person must be Debtor 1 in all of the forms.
Be as complete and accurate as possible. If two married people are filing together, both are equally responsible for supplying correct
information. If more space is needed, attach a separate sheet to this form. On the top of any additional pages, write your name and case number
(if known). Answer every question.

 Part 1:     Identify Yourself

                                       About Debtor 1:                                              About Debtor 2 (Spouse Only in a Joint Case):
 1.   Your full name
                                       __________________________________________________           __________________________________________________
      Write the name that is on your   First name                                                   First name
      government-issued picture
      identification (for example,     __________________________________________________           __________________________________________________
      your driver’s license or         Middle name                                                  Middle name
      passport).                       __________________________________________________           __________________________________________________
                                       Last name                                                    Last name
      Bring your picture
      identification to your meeting   ___________________________                                  ___________________________
      with the trustee.                Suffix (Sr., Jr., II, III)                                   Suffix (Sr., Jr., II, III)



 2.   All other names you              __________________________________________________           __________________________________________________
                                       First name                                                   First name
      have used in the last 8
      years                            __________________________________________________           __________________________________________________
                                       Middle name                                                  Middle name
      Include your married or
      maiden names and any             __________________________________________________           __________________________________________________
                                       Last name                                                    Last name
      assumed, trade names and
      doing business as names.
                                       __________________________________________________           __________________________________________________
      Do NOT list the name of any      First name                                                   First name
      separate legal entity, such
                                       __________________________________________________           __________________________________________________
      as a corporation,                Middle name                                                  Middle name
      partnership, or LLC, that is
      not filing this petition.        __________________________________________________           __________________________________________________
                                       Last name                                                    Last name

                                       __________________________________________________           __________________________________________________
                                       Business name (if applicable)                                Business name (if applicable)

                                       __________________________________________________           __________________________________________________
                                       Business name (if applicable)                                Business name (if applicable)



 3.   Only the last 4 digits of
      your Social Security             xxx      – xx – ____ ____ ____ ____                          xxx      – xx – ____ ____ ____ ____
      number or federal                OR                                                           OR
      Individual Taxpayer
      Identification number            9 xx – xx – ____ ____ ____ ____                              9 xx – xx – ____ ____ ____ ____
      (ITIN)

Official Form 101                                 Voluntary Petition for Individuals Filing for Bankruptcy                           page 1
                                                                                                                  Rules Appendix C - Page 3
Debtor 1      _______________________________________________________                              Case number (if known)_____________________________________
              First Name     Middle Name           Last Name



                                           About Debtor 1:                                               About Debtor 2 (Spouse Only in a Joint Case):


 4.   EIN (Employer                        ___ ___ – ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___                         ___ ___ – ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___
      Identification Number)               EIN                                                           EIN
      issued to you, if any.
                                           ___ ___ – ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___                         ___ ___ – ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___
      Do NOT list the EIN of any           EIN                                                           EIN
      separate legal entity, such as
      your employer, a corporation,
      a partnership, or an LLC, that
      is not filing this petition.




 5.   Where you live                                                                                     If Debtor 2 lives at a different address:



                                           _________________________________________________             _________________________________________________
                                           Number     Street                                             Number     Street


                                           _________________________________________________             _________________________________________________


                                           _________________________________________________             _________________________________________________
                                           City                            State   ZIP Code              City                            State   ZIP Code


                                           _________________________________________________             _________________________________________________
                                           County                                                        County


                                           If your mailing address is different from the one             If Debtor 2’s mailing address is different from
                                           above, fill it in here. Note that the court will send         yours, fill it in here. Note that the court will send
                                           any notices to you at this mailing address.                   any notices to this mailing address.


                                           _________________________________________________             _________________________________________________
                                           Number     Street                                             Number     Street

                                           _________________________________________________             _________________________________________________
                                           P.O. Box                                                      P.O. Box


                                           _________________________________________________             _________________________________________________
                                           City                            State   ZIP Code              City                            State   ZIP Code




 6.   Why you are choosing                 Check one:                                                    Check one:
      this district to file for
      bankruptcy                            Over the last 180 days before filing this petition,          Over the last 180 days before filing this petition,
                                              I have lived in this district longer than in any               I have lived in this district longer than in any
                                              other district.                                                other district.

                                            I have another reason. Explain.                              I have another reason. Explain.
                                              (See 28 U.S.C. § 1408.)                                        (See 28 U.S.C. § 1408.)
                                              ________________________________________                       ________________________________________
                                              ________________________________________                       ________________________________________
                                              ________________________________________                       ________________________________________
                                              ________________________________________                       ________________________________________




  Official Form 101                                Voluntary Petition for Individuals Filing for Bankruptcy                                      page 2
           Rules Appendix C - Page 4
Debtor 1     _______________________________________________________                          Case number (if known)_____________________________________
             First Name   Middle Name           Last Name



 Part 2:     Tell the Court About Your Bankruptcy Case


 7.   The chapter of the                Check one. (For a brief description of each, see Notice Required by 11 U.S.C. § 342(b) for Individuals Filing
      Bankruptcy Code you               for Bankruptcy (Form 2010)). Also, go to the top of page 1 and check the appropriate box.
      are choosing to file
      under
                                         Chapter 7
                                         Chapter 11
                                         Chapter 12
                                         Chapter 13

 8.   How you will pay the fee           I will pay the entire fee when I file my petition. Please check with the clerk’s office in your
                                           local court for more details about how you may pay. Typically, if you are paying the fee
                                           yourself, you may pay with cash, cashier’s check, or money order. If your attorney is
                                           submitting your payment on your behalf, your attorney may pay with a credit card or check
                                           with a pre-printed address.

                                         I need to pay the fee in installments. If you choose this option, sign and attach the
                                           Application for Individuals to Pay The Filing Fee in Installments (Official Form 103A).

                                         I request that my fee be waived (You may request this option only if you are filing for Chapter 7.
                                           By law, a judge may, but is not required to, waive your fee, and may do so only if your income is
                                           less than 150% of the official poverty line that applies to your family size and you are unable to
                                           pay the fee in installments). If you choose this option, you must fill out the Application to Have the
                                           Chapter 7 Filing Fee Waived (Official Form 103B) and file it with your petition.


 9.   Have you filed for                 No
      bankruptcy within the
      last 8 years?                      Yes. District __________________________ When        _______________ Case number ___________________________
                                                                                               MM / DD / YYYY

                                                  District __________________________ When     _______________ Case number ___________________________
                                                                                               MM / DD / YYYY

                                                  District __________________________ When     _______________ Case number ___________________________
                                                                                               MM / DD / YYYY



 10. Are any bankruptcy                  No
      cases pending or being
      filed by a spouse who is           Yes. Debtor _________________________________________________ Relationship to you         _____________________
      not filing this case with                   District __________________________ When     _______________ Case number, if known____________________
      you, or by a business                                                                    MM / DD / YYYY
      partner, or by an
      affiliate?
                                                  Debtor _________________________________________________ Relationship to you      _____________________

                                                  District __________________________ When     _______________ Case number, if known____________________
                                                                                               MM / DD / YYYY



 11. Do you rent your                    No. Go to line 12.
      residence?                         Yes. Has your landlord obtained an eviction judgment against you?
                                                   No. Go to line 12.
                                                   Yes. Fill out Initial Statement About an Eviction Judgment Against You (Form 101A) and file it as
                                                      part of this bankruptcy petition.




  Official Form 101                             Voluntary Petition for Individuals Filing for Bankruptcy                                  page 3
                                                                                                                    Rules Appendix C - Page 5
Debtor 1      _______________________________________________________                            Case number (if known)_____________________________________
              First Name     Middle Name           Last Name




 Part 3:     Report About Any Businesses You Own as a Sole Proprietor


 12. Are you a sole proprietor              No. Go to Part 4.
     of any full- or part-time
     business?                              Yes. Name and location of business
     A sole proprietorship is a
     business you operate as an                    _______________________________________________________________________________________
                                                   Name of business, if any
     individual, and is not a
     separate legal entity such as
     a corporation, partnership, or                _______________________________________________________________________________________
                                                   Number    Street
     LLC.
     If you have more than one
                                                   _______________________________________________________________________________________
     sole proprietorship, use a
     separate sheet and attach it
     to this petition.                             _______________________________________________        _______      __________________________
                                                    City                                                  State        ZIP Code


                                                   Check the appropriate box to describe your business:
                                                    Health Care Business (as defined in 11 U.S.C. § 101(27A))
                                                    Single Asset Real Estate (as defined in 11 U.S.C. § 101(51B))
                                                    Stockbroker (as defined in 11 U.S.C. § 101(53A))
                                                    Commodity Broker (as defined in 11 U.S.C. § 101(6))
                                                    None of the above

 13. Are you filing under                  If you are filing under Chapter 11, the court must know whether you are a small business debtor so that it can
     Chapter 11 of the                     set appropriate deadlines. If you indicate that you are a small business debtor, you must attach your most
     Bankruptcy Code, and                  recent balance sheet, statement of operations, cash-flow statement, and federal income tax return or if any of
                                           these documents do not exist, follow the procedure in 11 U.S.C. § 1116(1)(B).
     are you a small business
     debtor
                                            No. I am not filing under Chapter 11.
     For a definition of small
     business debtor, see                   No. I am filing under Chapter 11, but I am NOT a small business debtor according to the definition in the
     11 U.S.C. § 101(51D).                         Bankruptcy Code.

                                            Yes. I am filing under Chapter 11, I am a small business debtor according to the definition in the
                                                   Bankruptcy Code, and I do not choose to proceed under Subchapter V of Chapter 11.

                                            Yes. I am filing under Chapter 11, I am a small business debtor according to the definition in the
                                                   Bankruptcy Code, and I choose to proceed under Subchapter V of Chapter 11.
 Part 4:     Report if You Own or Have Any Hazardous Property or Any Property That Needs Immediate Attention


 14. Do you own or have any                 No
     property that poses or is
     alleged to pose a threat               Yes. What is the hazard?        ________________________________________________________________________
     of imminent and
     identifiable hazard to                                                  ________________________________________________________________________
     public health or safety?
     Or do you own any
     property that needs
                                                     If immediate attention is needed, why is it needed? _______________________________________________
     immediate attention?
     For example, do you own                                                 ________________________________________________________________________
     perishable goods, or livestock
     that must be fed, or a building
     that needs urgent repairs?
                                                     Where is the property? ________________________________________________________________________
                                                                             Number         Street


                                                                             ________________________________________________________________________

                                                                             ________________________________________ _______          ____________________
                                                                             City                                     State            ZIP Code



  Official Form 101                                Voluntary Petition for Individuals Filing for Bankruptcy                                  page 4
           Rules Appendix C - Page 6
Debtor 1      _______________________________________________________                                 Case number (if known)_____________________________________
              First Name     Middle Name           Last Name



 Part 5:     Explain Your Efforts to Receive a Briefing About Credit Counseling
                                           About Debtor 1:
                                                                                                             About Debtor 2 (Spouse Only in a Joint Case):
 15. Tell the court whether
     you have received a                   You must check one:                                               You must check one:
     briefing about credit
     counseling.                            I received a briefing from an approved credit                    I received a briefing from an approved credit
                                              counseling agency within the 180 days before I                     counseling agency within the 180 days before I
                                              filed this bankruptcy petition, and I received a                   filed this bankruptcy petition, and I received a
     The law requires that you
                                              certificate of completion.                                         certificate of completion.
     receive a briefing about credit
     counseling before you file for           Attach a copy of the certificate and the payment                   Attach a copy of the certificate and the payment
     bankruptcy. You must                     plan, if any, that you developed with the agency.                  plan, if any, that you developed with the agency.
     truthfully check one of the
     following choices. If you              I received a briefing from an approved credit                    I received a briefing from an approved credit
     cannot do so, you are not                counseling agency within the 180 days before I                     counseling agency within the 180 days before I
     eligible to file.                        filed this bankruptcy petition, but I do not have a                filed this bankruptcy petition, but I do not have a
                                              certificate of completion.                                         certificate of completion.
     If you file anyway, the court            Within 14 days after you file this bankruptcy petition,            Within 14 days after you file this bankruptcy petition,
     can dismiss your case, you               you MUST file a copy of the certificate and payment                you MUST file a copy of the certificate and payment
     will lose whatever filing fee            plan, if any.                                                      plan, if any.
     you paid, and your creditors
     can begin collection activities        I certify that I asked for credit counseling                     I certify that I asked for credit counseling
     again.                                   services from an approved agency, but was                          services from an approved agency, but was
                                              unable to obtain those services during the 7                       unable to obtain those services during the 7
                                              days after I made my request, and exigent                          days after I made my request, and exigent
                                              circumstances merit a 30-day temporary waiver                      circumstances merit a 30-day temporary waiver
                                              of the requirement.                                                of the requirement.
                                              To ask for a 30-day temporary waiver of the                        To ask for a 30-day temporary waiver of the
                                              requirement, attach a separate sheet explaining                    requirement, attach a separate sheet explaining
                                              what efforts you made to obtain the briefing, why                  what efforts you made to obtain the briefing, why
                                              you were unable to obtain it before you filed for                  you were unable to obtain it before you filed for
                                              bankruptcy, and what exigent circumstances                         bankruptcy, and what exigent circumstances
                                              required you to file this case.                                    required you to file this case.
                                              Your case may be dismissed if the court is                         Your case may be dismissed if the court is
                                              dissatisfied with your reasons for not receiving a                 dissatisfied with your reasons for not receiving a
                                              briefing before you filed for bankruptcy.                          briefing before you filed for bankruptcy.
                                              If the court is satisfied with your reasons, you must              If the court is satisfied with your reasons, you must
                                              still receive a briefing within 30 days after you file.            still receive a briefing within 30 days after you file.
                                              You must file a certificate from the approved                      You must file a certificate from the approved
                                              agency, along with a copy of the payment plan you                  agency, along with a copy of the payment plan you
                                              developed, if any. If you do not do so, your case                  developed, if any. If you do not do so, your case
                                              may be dismissed.                                                  may be dismissed.
                                              Any extension of the 30-day deadline is granted                    Any extension of the 30-day deadline is granted
                                              only for cause and is limited to a maximum of 15                   only for cause and is limited to a maximum of 15
                                              days.                                                              days.

                                            I am not required to receive a briefing about                    I am not required to receive a briefing about
                                              credit counseling because of:                                      credit counseling because of:

                                               Incapacity.      I have a mental illness or a mental              Incapacity.      I have a mental illness or a mental
                                                                 deficiency that makes me                                           deficiency that makes me
                                                                 incapable of realizing or making                                   incapable of realizing or making
                                                                 rational decisions about finances.                                 rational decisions about finances.
                                               Disability.      My physical disability causes me                 Disability.      My physical disability causes me
                                                                 to be unable to participate in a                                   to be unable to participate in a
                                                                 briefing in person, by phone, or                                   briefing in person, by phone, or
                                                                 through the internet, even after I                                 through the internet, even after I
                                                                 reasonably tried to do so.                                         reasonably tried to do so.
                                               Active duty. I am currently on active military                    Active duty. I am currently on active military
                                                                 duty in a military combat zone.                                    duty in a military combat zone.
                                              If you believe you are not required to receive a                   If you believe you are not required to receive a
                                              briefing about credit counseling, you must file a                  briefing about credit counseling, you must file a
                                              motion for waiver of credit counseling with the court.             motion for waiver of credit counseling with the court.




  Official Form 101                                Voluntary Petition for Individuals Filing for Bankruptcy                                        page 5
                                                                                                                            Rules Appendix C - Page 7
Debtor 1      _______________________________________________________                            Case number (if known)_____________________________________
              First Name   Middle Name           Last Name



  Part 6:    Answer These Questions for Reporting Purposes

                                         16a. Are your debts primarily consumer debts? Consumer debts are defined in 11 U.S.C. § 101(8) as
  16. What kind of debts do                   “incurred by an individual primarily for a personal, family, or household purpose.”
        you have?
                                              No. Go to line 16b.
                                              Yes. Go to line 17.
                                         16b. Are your debts primarily business debts? Business debts are debts that you incurred to obtain
                                              money for a business or investment or through the operation of the business or investment.
                                              No. Go to line 16c.
                                              Yes. Go to line 17.
                                         16c. State the type of debts you owe that are not consumer debts or business debts.
                                             _______________________________________________________________

  17. Are you filing under
        Chapter 7?                        No. I am not filing under Chapter 7. Go to line 18.
        Do you estimate that              Yes. I am filing under Chapter 7. Do you estimate that after any exempt property is excluded and
        after any exempt                         administrative expenses are paid that funds will be available to distribute to unsecured creditors?
        property is excluded and                  No
        administrative expenses
        are paid that funds will                  Yes
        be available for
        distribution to
        unsecured creditors?
  18.   How many creditors do             1-49                               1,000-5,000                               25,001-50,000
        you estimate that you             50-99                              5,001-10,000                              50,001-100,000
        owe?                              100-199                            10,001-25,000                             More than 100,000
                                          200-999
  19.   How much do you                   $0-$50,000                         $1,000,001-$10 million                    $500,000,001-$1 billion
        estimate your assets to           $50,001-$100,000                   $10,000,001-$50 million                   $1,000,000,001-$10 billion
        be worth?                         $100,001-$500,000                  $50,000,001-$100 million                  $10,000,000,001-$50 billion
                                          $500,001-$1 million                $100,000,001-$500 million                 More than $50 billion
 20.    How much do you                   $0-$50,000                         $1,000,001-$10 million                    $500,000,001-$1 billion
        estimate your                     $50,001-$100,000                   $10,000,001-$50 million                   $1,000,000,001-$10 billion
        liabilities to be?                $100,001-$500,000                  $50,000,001-$100 million                  $10,000,000,001-$50 billion
                                          $500,001-$1 million                $100,000,001-$500 million                 More than $50 billion




  Official Form 101                              Voluntary Petition for Individuals Filing for Bankruptcy                                   page 6
           Rules Appendix C - Page 8
Debtor 1     _______________________________________________________                             Case number (if known)_____________________________________
             First Name   Middle Name           Last Name



 Part 7:     Sign Below

                                        I have examined this petition, and I declare under penalty of perjury that the information provided is true and
 For you                                correct.
                                        If I have chosen to file under Chapter 7, I am aware that I may proceed, if eligible, under Chapter 7, 11,12, or 13
                                        of title 11, United States Code. I understand the relief available under each chapter, and I choose to proceed
                                        under Chapter 7.
                                        If no attorney represents me and I did not pay or agree to pay someone who is not an attorney to help me fill out
                                        this document, I have obtained and read the notice required by 11 U.S.C. § 342(b).
                                        I request relief in accordance with the chapter of title 11, United States Code, specified in this petition.
                                        I understand making a false statement, concealing property, or obtaining money or property by fraud in connection
                                        with a bankruptcy case can result in fines up to $250,000, or imprisonment for up to 20 years, or both.
                                        18 U.S.C. §§ 152, 1341, 1519, and 3571.


                                           ______________________________________________             _____________________________
                                           Signature of Debtor 1                                           Signature of Debtor 2

                                           Executed on _________________                                   Executed on __________________
                                                            MM   / DD    / YYYY                                             MM / DD    / YYYY


                                        I, the attorney for the debtor(s) named in this petition, declare that I have informed the debtor(s) about eligibility
 For your attorney, if you are          to proceed under Chapter 7, 11, 12, or 13 of title 11, United States Code, and have explained the relief
 represented by one                     available under each chapter for which the person is eligible. I also certify that I have delivered to the debtor(s)
                                        the notice required by 11 U.S.C. § 342(b) and, in a case in which § 707(b)(4)(D) applies, certify that I have no
 If you are not represented             knowledge after an inquiry that the information in the schedules filed with the petition is incorrect.
 by an attorney, you do not
 need to file this page.
                                        _________________________________                                  Date            _________________
                                           Signature of Attorney for Debtor                                                 MM   /    DD / YYYY




                                           _________________________________________________________________________________________________
                                           Printed name

                                           _________________________________________________________________________________________________
                                           Firm name

                                           _________________________________________________________________________________________________
                                           Number Street

                                           _________________________________________________________________________________________________

                                           ______________________________________________________ ____________ ______________________________
                                           City                                                   State        ZIP Code




                                           Contact phone _____________________________________             Email address    ______________________________




                                           ______________________________________________________ ____________
                                           Bar number                                             State




  Official Form 101                             Voluntary Petition for Individuals Filing for Bankruptcy                                        page 7
                                                                                                                           Rules Appendix C - Page 9
Debtor 1      _______________________________________________________                         Case number (if known)_____________________________________
              First Name   Middle Name          Last Name




 For you if you are filing this          The law allows you, as an individual, to represent yourself in bankruptcy court, but you
 bankruptcy without an                   should understand that many people find it extremely difficult to represent
 attorney                                themselves successfully. Because bankruptcy has long-term financial and legal
                                         consequences, you are strongly urged to hire a qualified attorney.
 If you are represented by
 an attorney, you do not                 To be successful, you must correctly file and handle your bankruptcy case. The rules are very
 need to file this page.                 technical, and a mistake or inaction may affect your rights. For example, your case may be
                                         dismissed because you did not file a required document, pay a fee on time, attend a meeting or
                                         hearing, or cooperate with the court, case trustee, U.S. trustee, bankruptcy administrator, or audit
                                         firm if your case is selected for audit. If that happens, you could lose your right to file another
                                         case, or you may lose protections, including the benefit of the automatic stay.
                                         You must list all your property and debts in the schedules that you are required to file with the
                                         court. Even if you plan to pay a particular debt outside of your bankruptcy, you must list that debt
                                         in your schedules. If you do not list a debt, the debt may not be discharged. If you do not list
                                         property or properly claim it as exempt, you may not be able to keep the property. The judge can
                                         also deny you a discharge of all your debts if you do something dishonest in your bankruptcy
                                         case, such as destroying or hiding property, falsifying records, or lying. Individual bankruptcy
                                         cases are randomly audited to determine if debtors have been accurate, truthful, and complete.
                                         Bankruptcy fraud is a serious crime; you could be fined and imprisoned.
                                         If you decide to file without an attorney, the court expects you to follow the rules as if you had
                                         hired an attorney. The court will not treat you differently because you are filing for yourself. To be
                                         successful, you must be familiar with the United States Bankruptcy Code, the Federal Rules of
                                         Bankruptcy Procedure, and the local rules of the court in which your case is filed. You must also
                                         be familiar with any state exemption laws that apply.

                                         Are you aware that filing for bankruptcy is a serious action with long-term financial and legal
                                         consequences?
                                          No
                                          Yes
                                         Are you aware that bankruptcy fraud is a serious crime and that if your bankruptcy forms are
                                         inaccurate or incomplete, you could be fined or imprisoned?
                                          No
                                          Yes
                                         Did you pay or agree to pay someone who is not an attorney to help you fill out your bankruptcy forms?
                                          No
                                          Yes. Name of Person_____________________________________________________________________.
                                                     Attach Bankruptcy Petition Preparer’s Notice, Declaration, and Signature (Official Form 119).



                                         By signing here, I acknowledge that I understand the risks involved in filing without an attorney. I
                                         have read and understood this notice, and I am aware that filing a bankruptcy case without an
                                         attorney may cause me to lose my rights or property if I do not properly handle the case.


                                         
                                         _______________________________________________             ______________________________
                                             Signature of Debtor 1                                       Signature of Debtor 2

                                         Date               _________________                            Date             _________________
                                                            MM / DD / YYYY                                                MM / DD / YYYY

                                         Contact phone ______________________________________            Contact phone    ________________________________

                                         Cell phone         ______________________________________       Cell phone       ________________________________

                                         Email address ______________________________________            Email address    ________________________________




  Official Form 101                             Voluntary Petition for Individuals Filing for Bankruptcy                                  page 8
           Rules Appendix C - Page 10
    Official Form 101 (Committee Note) (12/26)




1                          Committee Note

2           Question 4 has been amended to make it clear that
3   only debtors who themselves have an employer
4   identification number (EIN) should list it; they should not
5   include the EIN of their employer or any other entity not
6   filing the petition. Stylistic changes were made to
7   Question 2.




                                                        Rules Appendix C - Page 11
 Fill in this information to identify your case:

 Debtor 1          __________________________________________________________________
                     First Name                  Middle Name              Last Name

 Debtor 2            ________________________________________________________________
 (Spouse, if filing) First Name                  Middle Name              Last Name


 United States Bankruptcy Court for the: ______________________ District of __________
                                                                                      (State)
 Case number
  (If known)
                     ___________________________________________                                                                                Check if this is an
                                                                                                                                                   amended filing


Official Form 106C
Schedule C: The Property You Claim as Exempt                                                                                                                 12/26

Be as complete and accurate as possible. If two married people are filing together, both are equally responsible for supplying correct information.
Using the property you listed on Schedule A/B: Property (Official Form 106A/B) as your source, list the property that you claim as exempt. If more
space is needed, fill out and attach to this page as many copies of Part 2: Additional Page as necessary. On the top of any additional pages, write
your name and case number (if known).

For each item of property you claim as exempt, you must specify the amount of the exemption you claim. One way of doing so is to state a
specific dollar amount as exempt. Alternatively, you may claim the full fair market value of the property being exempted up to the amount
of any applicable statutory limit. Some exemptions—such as those for health aids, rights to receive certain benefits, and tax-exempt
retirement funds—may be unlimited in dollar amount. However, if you claim an exemption of 100% of fair market value under a law that
limits the exemption to a particular dollar amount and the value of the property is determined to exceed that amount, your exemption
would be limited to the applicable statutory amount.


   Part 1:         Identify the Property You Claim as Exempt


  1. Which set of exemptions are you claiming? Check one only, even if your spouse is filing with you.
         You are claiming state and federal nonbankruptcy exemptions. 11 U.S.C. § 522(b)(3)
         You are claiming federal exemptions. 11 U.S.C. § 522(b)(2)

  2. For any property you list on Schedule A/B that you claim as exempt, fill in the information below.


        A. Brief description of the property and line           B. Current value of         C. Amount of the exemption you           D. Specific laws that allow
           on Schedule A/B that lists this property                the portion you             claim                                    exemption
                                                                   own
                                                                Copy the value from         Check only one box for each exemption.
                                                                Schedule A/B

        Brief                                                                                                                        ____________________________
        description:
                                  _________________________     $________________                $ ____________                     ____________________________
        Line from                                                                                100% of fair market value, up to   ____________________________
        Schedule A/B: ______                                                                       any applicable statutory limit   ____________________________


        Brief                                                                                                                        ____________________________
        description:
                                  _________________________     $________________                $ ____________                     ____________________________
        Line from                                                                                100% of fair market value, up to   ____________________________
                      ______                                                                       any applicable statutory limit    ____________________________
        Schedule A/B:




  2.1 Add the dollar value of all entries with a specific amount from
        Column C, including any entries for pages you have attached.                               $_____________

  3. Are you claiming a homestead exemption of more than $214,000?
        (Subject to adjustment on 4/01/28 and every 3 years after that for cases filed on or after the date of adjustment.)
        No
        Yes. Did you acquire the property covered by the exemption within 1,215 days before you filed this case?
          No
          Yes
               Rules Appendix C - Page 12
Official Form 106C                                             Schedule C: The Property You Claim as Exempt                                             page 1 of __
Debtor 1         _______________________________________________________                          Case number (if known)_____________________________________
                 First Name      Middle Name       Last Name




   Part 2:        Additional Page

           A. Brief description of the property and            B. Current value of   C. Amount of the exemption you            D. Specific laws that allow
           line on Schedule A/B that lists this property       the portion you own   claim                                     exemption
                                                               Copy the value from
                                                               Schedule A/B          Check only one box for each exemption

       Brief                                                                                                                  ____________________________
       description:
                              _________________________        $________________      $ ____________                         ____________________________
       Line from     ______
                                                                                      100% of fair market value, up to       ____________________________
       Schedule A/B:                                                                    any applicable statutory limit       ____________________________

       Brief                                                                                                                  ____________________________
       description:
                              _________________________        $________________      $ ____________                         ____________________________
       Line from                                                                      100% of fair market value, up to       ____________________________
                     ______                                                             any applicable statutory limit        ____________________________
       Schedule A/B:

       Brief                                                                                                                  ____________________________
       description:
                              _________________________        $________________      $ ____________                         ____________________________
       Line from                                                                      100% of fair market value, up to       ____________________________
                     ______                                                             any applicable statutory limit        ____________________________
       Schedule A/B:

       Brief                                                                                                                  ____________________________
       description:
                              _________________________        $________________      $ ____________                         ____________________________
       Line from     ______
                                                                                      100% of fair market value, up to       ____________________________
       Schedule A/B:                                                                    any applicable statutory limit       ____________________________

       Brief                                                                                                                  ____________________________
       description:
                              _________________________        $________________      $ ____________                         ____________________________
       Line from                                                                      100% of fair market value, up to       ____________________________
       Schedule A/B: ______                                                             any applicable statutory limit        ____________________________


       Brief                                                                                                                  ____________________________
       description:
                              _________________________        $________________      $ ____________                         ____________________________
       Line from                                                                      100% of fair market value, up to       ____________________________
                     ______                                                             any applicable statutory limit        ____________________________
       Schedule A/B:

       Brief                                                                                                                  ____________________________
       description:
                              _________________________        $________________      $ ____________                         ____________________________
       Line from     ______
                                                                                      100% of fair market value, up to       ____________________________
       Schedule A/B:                                                                    any applicable statutory limit       ____________________________

       Brief                                                                                                                  ____________________________
       description:
                              _________________________        $________________      $ ____________                         ____________________________
       Line from                                                                      100% of fair market value, up to       ____________________________
                                                                                                                              ____________________________
       Schedule A/B: ______                                                             any applicable statutory limit


       Brief                                                                                                                  ____________________________
       description:
                              _________________________        $________________      $ ____________                         ____________________________
       Line from                                                                      100% of fair market value, up to       ____________________________
                     ______                                                             any applicable statutory limit        ____________________________
       Schedule A/B:

       Brief                                                                                                                  ____________________________
       description:
                              _________________________        $________________      $ ____________                         ____________________________
       Line from     ______
                                                                                      100% of fair market value, up to       ____________________________
       Schedule A/B:                                                                    any applicable statutory limit       ____________________________

       Brief                                                                                                                  ____________________________
       description:
                              _________________________        $________________      $ ____________                         ____________________________
       Line from                                                                      100% of fair market value, up to       ____________________________
       Schedule A/B: ______                                                             any applicable statutory limit        ____________________________




                                                                                                                         Rules Appendix C - Page 13
 Official Form 106C                                        Schedule C: The Property You Claim as Exempt                                       page ___ of __
                             Official Form 106C Committee Note (12/26)




                     1                              Committee Note

                     2               Part 1 of Official Form 106C is amended to add space
                     3       for providing the total amount of column C—amount of the
                     4       exemption claimed. In adding up the exemption amounts,
                     5       the debtor should include only those exemptions claimed in
                     6       specific dollar amounts.




Rules Appendix C - Page 14
          Excerpt from the May 7, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Bankruptcy Rules


                        COMMITTEE ON RULES OF PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
                                                    OF THE
                            JUDICIAL CONFERENCE OF THE UNITED STATES
                                      WASHINGTON, D.C. 20544

JAMES C. DEVER III                                                                CHAIRS OF ADVISORY COMMITTEES
     CHAIR
                                                                                             ALLISON H. EID
CAROLYN A. DUBAY                                                                            APPELLATE RULES
   SECRETARY
                                                                                         REBECCA B. CONNELLY
                                                                                          BANKRUPTCY RULES

                                                                                             SARAH S. VANCE
                                                                                               CIVIL RULES

                                                                                          MICHAEL W. MOSMAN
                                                                                            CRIMINAL RULES

                                                                                            JESSE M. FURMAN
                                                                                             EVIDENCE RULES



                                           MEMORANDUM *

    TO:              Hon. James C. Dever III, Chair
                     Committee on Rules of Practice and Procedure

    FROM:            Hon. Rebecca B. Connelly, Chair
                     Advisory Committee on Bankruptcy Rules

    RE:              Report of the Advisory Committee on Bankruptcy Rules

    DATE:            May 7, 2026


    I.      Introduction

            The Advisory Committee on Bankruptcy Rules met in Charlotte, N.C., on April 15, 2026.
    ***

           At the meeting, the Advisory Committee voted to recommend final approval of
    amendments to Bankruptcy Rule 2002 (Notices), Official Form 101 (Voluntary Petition for
    Individuals Filing for Bankruptcy), and Official Form 106C (Schedule C: The Property You Claim
    as Exempt).


    *
     A copy of the full committee report can be found in the June 2026 Standing Committee agenda book
    publicly available on www.uscourts.gov.



                                                                                   Rules Appendix C - Page 15
       Excerpt from the May 7, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Bankruptcy Rules


                                               *****

         Part II of this report presents those action items. They are organized as follows:
A.       Items for Final Approval
         Rules and Forms published for comment in August 2025—
         ●        Rule 2002;
         ●        Official Form 101; and
         ●        Official Form 106C
                                               *****

II.      Action Items

A.       Items for Final Approval

       The Advisory Committee recommends that the following rule and form amendments
be given final approval. Bankruptcy Tab 16 includes the rules and forms that are in this group.

        Action Item 1. Rule 2002 (Notices). The Advisory Committee received a suggestion from
the Clerk of Court for the Bankruptcy Court for the District of Minnesota—joined by eight other
bankruptcy clerks from the Eighth Circuit—that Rule 2002(n) (now Rule 2002(o)) be amended to
eliminate the requirement that the caption of every notice given under Rule 2002 comply with Rule
1005. The Bankruptcy Clerks Advisory Group submitted a second suggestion supporting the
original one.

        Upon the recommendation of the Advisory Committee, the Standing Committee at its
meeting in January 2025 approved for publication an amendment to Rule 2002(o) to remove the
requirement that notices given under Rule 2002 conform to Rule 1005 and to instead require that
such notices “include the information that Form 416B requires.” This change would reduce the
length, and therefore cost, of a Rule 2002 notice, as well as reducing the number of documents
containing the last four digits of the debtor’s social security number.

      There were no comments on the suggested amendment. The Advisory Committee
recommended final approval of the amendment.

     Action Item 2. Official Form 101 (Voluntary Petition for Individuals Filing for
Bankruptcy).

        Amendments to the prompt to Question 4 of the form to add a new paragraph regarding
employer identification numbers (“EINs”) were published last August. The amendment is intended
to minimize the likelihood that a debtor may provide the EIN of the debtor’s employer, rather than
the debtor’s own number if he or she has one. Because multiple debtors who have the same
employer may file and list that employer’s EIN, the CM/ECF monitoring for repeat filings triggers
a report erroneously suggesting that the debtor is not eligible because of prior filings.


Rules Appendix C - Page 16
      Excerpt from the May 7, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Bankruptcy Rules



       There were no comments in response to the publication of the proposed amendment. The
Advisory Committee recommended final approval of the amendment with minor changes to both
Question 4 and Question 2 suggested by the style consultants.

       Action Item 3. Official Form 106C (Schedule C: The Property You Claim as Exempt)

        The Advisory Committee received a suggestion from a chapter 12/chapter 13 trustee to
amend Official Form 106C to include a total value of claimed exemptions. Section 589b(d)(3) of
title 28 requires the uniform final report submitted by trustees to total the “assets exempted.”
Without the amount totaled on the form, trustees must manually add up the amounts on each form
to prepare the required final report.

         Complicating the decision of how to respond to the suggestion was the fact that Form
106C—in response to a statement by the Supreme Court in Schwab v. Reilly, 560 U.S. 770
(2010)—provides two options for claiming an exemption. The debtor can either list a specific
dollar amount or can claim as exempt “100% of fair market value, up to any applicable statutory
limit.” If the latter option is chosen, there is no dollar amount that can be added.

         The Advisory Committee resolved this problem by proposing an amendment to Form 106C
to require the debtor to “[a]dd the dollar value of all entries [in Column C] with a specific amount.”
It also approved for publication the addition of a space on the form for the total value of the debtor’s
interest in property for which exemptions are claimed (in Column B).

       The form was published last August, and one comment was filed in response. The National
Association of Consumer Bankruptcy Attorneys (“NACBA”) expressed concern about the
wording of the directive to add the total value of the debtor’s interest in property for which
exemptions are claimed. NACBA urged the Advisory Committee to revise the form to “add the
language ‘with a specific amount’ to the section calling for the total for Column B.” (NACBA also
suggested revisiting the approach taken on the form in response to Schwab v. Reilly.)

        The suggestion that prompted the proposed amendments to Form 106C only sought a total
value of the claimed exemptions and not a total of the property values. The addition to the form of
space for the latter was really an afterthought—for the sake of symmetry. The Consumer
Subcommittee considered whether there is a need for a total of Column B. It decided that there is
not because trustees do not include that total in their final report and that figure has no significance
in the bankruptcy case. The subcommittee therefore recommended that item 2.1 be deleted from
the form as published and that, with that deletion and the renumbering of item 2.2, the amendment
to Official Form 106C be given final approval.

        The Advisory Committee recommended final approval of the amendments to Form 106C
with the deletion of item 2.1 and the renumbering of item 2.2 and agreed with the subcommittee
not to revisit Schwab.

                                               *****




                                                                                 Rules Appendix C - Page 17
                                                         Agenda E-19 (Appendix D)
                                                                           Rules
                                                                  September 2026




       PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE FEDERAL
            RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE1


 1   Rule 7.1.         Disclosure Statement

 2   (a)    Who Must File; Contents.

 3          (1)        Nongovernmental Corporations Business

 4                             Organizations. A nongovernmental

 5                             corporate business organization that

 6                             is a party or a nongovernmental

 7                             corporation that seeks to intervene

 8                             must file a statement that:

 9                     (A)     identifies any parent corporation

10                             business       organization   and     any

11                             publicly held corporation business

12                             organization owning that directly or

13                             indirectly owns 10% or more of its

14                             stock it; or




            1
                New material is underlined; matter to be omitted is lined
     through.




                                                                   Rules Appendix D - Page 1
                            2                 FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE




                   15                      (B)     states that there is no such corporation

                   16                              business organization.

                   17                                 *****

                   18                             Committee Note

                   19               Rule 7.1(a)(1) is amended in two ways intended to
                   20       better assist judges in complying with their statutory and
                   21       ethical duty to recuse in cases in which they or relevant
                   22       family members have “a financial interest in the subject
                   23       matter in controversy or in a party to the proceeding, or any
                   24       other interest that could be substantially affected by the
                   25       outcome of the proceeding.” 28 U.S.C. § 455(b)(4); Code of
                   26       Conduct for United States Judges Canon 3C(1)(c).

                   27              First, the amended rule substitutes “business
                   28       organization” in place of references to “corporation” to
                   29       cover entities not organized as “corporations,” defined
                   30       narrowly. “Business organizations” is a more capacious term
                   31       intended to flexibly adapt to the ever-changing variety of
                   32       commercial entities, and the term is generally accepted and
                   33       well understood. See, e.g., Uniform Business Organizations
                   34       Code (2015).

                   35               Second, the rule is amended to require disclosure of
                   36       business organizations that “directly or indirectly own 10%
                   37       or more of” a party, whether or not that ownership interest is
                   38       formally denominated as stock. Such a direct or indirect
                   39       owner is presumed to hold a sufficient interest in a party to
                   40       raise a rebuttable presumption that a judge’s financial
                   41       interest in the owner extends to the party, warranting recusal.
                   42       See U.S. Judicial Conference, Guide to Judiciary Policy
                   43       § 220, Committee on Codes of Conduct, Advisory Opinion
                   44       No. 57: Disqualification Based on a Parent-Subsidiary




Rules Appendix D - Page 2
        FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE                          3




45   Relationship (Feb. 2024). Under the amended rule, a party
46   must disclose not only a parent business organization but
47   also any publicly held business organization that is a
48   grandparent, great-grandparent, or other corporate relative
49   that owns 10% or more of a party, whether directly or
50   through another business organization. The requirement to
51   disclose “indirect” owners of 10% or more of a party is a
52   pragmatic effort to better inform judges of circumstances
53   when their financial interests may be affected by a litigation
54   or when further inquiry into the ownership interests in a
55   party is appropriate.

56           As before, this rule does not capture every scenario
57   that might require a judge to recuse. As reflected in the
58   Committee on Codes of Conduct Advisory Opinion No. 57,
59   a judge may need to seek additional information about a
60   party’s business affiliations when deciding whether to
61   recuse. And, as before, districts may promulgate local rules
62   requiring additional disclosures.




                                                             Rules Appendix D - Page 3
                              PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE FEDERAL
                                   RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE1


                     1      Rule 26.          Duty to Disclose; General Provisions
                     2                        Governing Discovery

                     3      (a)    Required Disclosures.

                     4                                      *****

                     5             (3)        Pretrial Disclosures.

                     6                        (A)     In General. In addition to the

                     7                                disclosures required by Rule 26(a)(1)

                     8                                and (2), a party must provide to the

                     9                                other parties and promptly file the

                   10                                 following information about the

                   11                                 evidence that it may present at trial

                   12                                 other than solely for impeachment:

                   13                                 (i)     the    name     and,    (if   not

                   14                                         previously     provided),     the

                   15                                         address and telephone number



                                   1
                                       New material is underlined; matter to be omitted is lined
                            through.




Rules Appendix D - Page 4
     2          FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE




16                                 of each witness—separately

17                                 identifying those the party

18                                 expects to present and those it

19                                 may call if the need arises, and

20                                 whether     it    expects      the

21                                 testimony to be in person or

22                                 remote;

23                        (ii)     the   designation    of     those

24                                 witnesses whose testimony

25                                 the party expects to present by

26                                 deposition and, if not taken

27                                 stenographically, a transcript

28                                 of the pertinent parts of the

29                                 deposition; and

30                               *****

31                       Committee Note

32          Under Rule 43, the court may permit remote
33   testimony at trial. Because Rule 26 requires disclosure of
34   witnesses a party “expects to present,” it should be
35   understood to include witnesses who will testify remotely




                                                               Rules Appendix D - Page 5
                               FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE                          3




                   36       upon court approval. This amendment clarifies that the
                   37       disclosure requirement applies whether or not the witness is
                   38       testifying in person or remotely and alerts the parties and the
                   39       court that a party proposes to present one or more witnesses
                   40       remotely.




Rules Appendix D - Page 6
       PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE FEDERAL
            RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE1


 1   Rule 41.          Dismissal of Actions or Claims

 2   (a)    Voluntary Dismissal.

 3          (1)        By the a Plaintiff.

 4                     (A)     Without a Court Order. Subject to

 5                             Rules 23(e), 23.1(c), 23.2, and 66 and

 6                             any applicable federal statute, the a

 7                             plaintiff may dismiss an its action or

 8                             one or more of its claims without a

 9                             court order by filing:

10                             (i)     a notice of dismissal before

11                                     the opposing party serves

12                                     either an answer or a motion

13                                     for summary judgment; or

14                             (ii)    a stipulation of dismissal

15                                     signed by all parties who have


            1
                New material is underlined; matter to be omitted is lined
     through.




                                                                  Rules Appendix D - Page 7
                            2         FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE




                   16                                  appeared and remain in the

                   17                                  action.

                   18                             *****

                   19           (2)     By Court Order; Effect. Except as provided

                   20                   in Rule 41(a)(1), an action or one or more

                   21                   claims may be dismissed at the a plaintiff’s

                   22                   request only by court order, on terms that the

                   23                   court considers proper. If a defendant has

                   24                   pleaded a counterclaim before being served

                   25                   with the plaintiff’s motion to dismiss, the

                   26                   action, claim, or claims may be dismissed

                   27                   over the defendant’s objection only if the

                   28                   counterclaim    can      remain   pending   for

                   29                   independent adjudication. Unless the order

                   30                   states otherwise, a dismissal under this

                   31                   paragraph (2) is without prejudice.

                   32                             *****




Rules Appendix D - Page 8
        FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE                            3




33                          Committee Note

34            Rule 41 is amended in two ways. First, Rule 41(a)
35   has been amended to add language clarifying that a plaintiff
36   may voluntarily dismiss “one or more of its claims” in a
37   multi-claim case. A plaintiff may accomplish dismissal of
38   either its action or one or more of its claims unilaterally prior
39   to an answer or motion for summary judgment by a party
40   opposing that claim, or by stipulation or court order. Some
41   courts interpreted the previous language to mean that only
42   an entire case, i.e. all claims against all defendants, or only
43   all claims against one or more defendants, could be
44   dismissed under this rule. The language suggesting that
45   voluntary dismissal could only be of an entire case has
46   remained unchanged since the 1938 promulgation of the
47   rule. In the intervening years, multi-claim and multi-party
48   cases have become more typical, and courts are now
49   encouraged to both simplify and facilitate settlement of
50   cases. The amended rule is therefore more consistent with
51   widespread practice and the general policy of narrowing the
52   issues during pretrial proceedings. This amendment to Rule
53   41(a), permitting voluntary dismissal of a claim or claims,
54   does not affect the operation of Rule 41(d), whose
55   applicability is limited to situations when the plaintiff has
56   previously dismissed an entire action.

57           Second, Rule 41(a)(1)(A)(ii) is amended to clarify
58   that a stipulation of dismissal need be signed only by all
59   parties who have appeared and remain in the action. Some
60   courts had interpreted the prior language to require all parties
61   who had ever appeared in a case to sign a stipulation of
62   dismissal, including those who have dismissed all claims, or
63   had all claims against them dismissed. Such a requirement
64   can be overly burdensome and an unnecessary obstacle to
65   narrowing the scope of a case; signatures of the parties
66   currently litigating claims at the time of the stipulation




                                                               Rules Appendix D - Page 9
                             4           FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE




                   67        provide both sufficient notice to those actively involved in
                   68        the case and better facilitate formulating and simplifying the
                   69        issues and eliminating claims that the parties agree to
                   70        resolve.




Rules Appendix D - Page 10
       PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE FEDERAL
            RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE1


 1   Rule 45.          Subpoena

 2                                    *****

 3   (b)    Service.

 4          (1)        By Whom and How; Tendering Means;

 5                     Notice Period; Fees.

 6                     (A)     By Whom and How. Any person who

 7                             is at least 18 years old and not a party

 8                             may serve a subpoena. Serving a

 9                             subpoena requires:

10                             (i)       delivering a copy to the

11                                       named person personally;

12                             (ii)     leaving a copy at the person’s

13                                      dwelling or usual place of

14                                      abode    with    someone      of




            1
                New material is underlined; matter to be omitted is lined
     through.




                                                                 Rules Appendix D - Page 11
                             2   FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE




                   15                            suitable age and discretion

                   16                            who resides there;

                   17                    (iii)   sending a copy to the person’s

                   18                            last known address by a

                   19                            method of United States mail

                   20                            or          commercial-carrier

                   21                            delivery,    if   the    selected

                   22                            method provides confirmation

                   23                            of actual receipt by a person

                   24                            identified in (i) or (ii); or

                   25                    (iv)    using another means that is

                   26                            authorized by the court for

                   27                            good cause and is reasonably

                   28                            calculated to give notice.

                   29              (B)   Time to Serve if Attendance Is

                   30                    Required; Tendering Fees. and, iIf

                   31                    the subpoena requires that the named

                   32                    person’s attendance, a trial, hearing,




Rules Appendix D - Page 12
        FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE                         3




33                         or deposition, unless the court orders

34                         otherwise, the subpoena must be

35                         served at least 14 days before the date

36                         on which the person is commanded to

37                         attend. In addition, the party serving

38                         the subpoena must tendering the fees

39                         for 1 day’s attendance and the

40                         mileage allowed by law at the time of

41                         service, or at the time and place the

42                         person is commanded to appear. Fees

43                         and mileage need not be tendered

44                         when the subpoena issues on behalf

45                         of the United States or any of its

46                         officers or agencies.

47                       Committee Note

48           Rule 45(b)(1) is amended to clarify the means of
49   serving a subpoena. Courts have disagreed about whether the
50   rule requires hand delivery. Though service of a subpoena
51   usually does not present problems—particularly with regard
52   to deposition subpoenas—uncertainty about what the rule
53   requires has on occasion caused delays and imposed costs.




                                                           Rules Appendix D - Page 13
                             4           FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE




                   54                The amendment removes that ambiguity by
                   55        providing that methods authorized under Rule 4(e)(2)(A)
                   56        and (B) for service of a summons and complaint constitute
                   57        effective service of a subpoena. Though the issues involved
                   58        with service of a summons are not identical with service of
                   59        a subpoena, the basic goal is to give notice and the
                   60        authorized methods should assure notice. In place of the
                   61        current rule’s use of “delivering,” these methods of service
                   62        also are familiar methods that ought easily adapt to the
                   63        subpoena context.

                   64                 The amendment also adds another option—service
                   65        by United States mail or commercial carrier to the person’s
                   66        last known address, if the selected method provides
                   67        confirmation of actual receipt by a person identified in
                   68        Rule 45(b)(1)(A)(i) or (ii). The rule does not prescribe the
                   69        exact means of confirmation, but courts should be alert to
                   70        ensuring that there is reliable confirmation of actual receipt.
                   71        Experience has shown that this method regularly works and
                   72        is reliable.

                   73                The amended rule also authorizes a court order
                   74        permitting an additional method of serving a subpoena so
                   75        long as that method is reasonably calculated to give notice.
                   76        A party seeking such an order must establish good cause,
                   77        which ordinarily would require at least first resort to the
                   78        authorized methods of service. The application should also
                   79        demonstrate that the proposed method is reasonably
                   80        calculated to give notice.

                   81                The amendment adds a requirement that the person
                   82        served be given at least 14 days’ notice if the subpoena
                   83        commands attendance at a trial, hearing, or deposition.
                   84        Rule 45(a)(4) requires the party serving the subpoena to give
                   85        notice to the other parties before serving it, but the rule does
                   86        not presently require any advance notice to the person




Rules Appendix D - Page 14
         FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE                         5




 87   commanded to appear. Compliance may be difficult without
 88   reasonable notice. Providing 14-day notice is a method of
 89   avoiding possible burdens on the person served. In addition,
 90   emergency motions for relief from a subpoena can burden
 91   courts. For good cause, the court may shorten the notice
 92   period on application by the serving party.

 93           The amendment also simplifies the task of serving
 94   the subpoena by removing the requirement that the witness
 95   fee under 28 U.S.C. § 1821 be tendered at the time of service
 96   as a prerequisite to effective service. Though tender at the
 97   time of service should be done whenever practicable, the
 98   amendment permits tender to occur instead at the time and
 99   place the subpoena commands the person to appear. The
100   requirement to tender fees at the time of service has in some
101   cases further complicated the process of serving a subpoena,
102   and this alternative should simplify the task.




                                                            Rules Appendix D - Page 15
                               PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE FEDERAL
                                    RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE1


                     1       Rule 45.          Subpoena

                     2                                    *****

                     3       (c)    Place of Compliance.

                     4              (1)        For a Trial, Hearing, or Deposition. A

                     5                         subpoena may command a person to attend a

                     6                         trial, hearing, or deposition only as follows:

                     7                         (A)     within 100 miles of where the person

                     8                                 resides, is employed, or regularly

                     9                                 transacts business in person; or

                   10                          (B)     within the state where the person

                   11                                  resides, is employed, or regularly

                   12                                  transacts business in person, if the

                   13                                  person




                                    1
                                        New material is underlined; matter to be omitted is lined
                             through.




Rules Appendix D - Page 16
     2          FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE




14                       (i)    is a party or a party’s officer;

15                              or

16                       (ii)   is commanded to attend a trial

17                              and     would      not    incur

18                              substantial expense.

19       (2)      For      Remote      Testimony.        Under

20                Rule 45(c)(1), the place of attendance for

21                remote testimony is the location where the

22                person is commanded to appear in person.

23       (32)     For Other Discovery. A subpoena may

24                command:

25                (A)    production       of        documents,

26                       electronically stored information, or

27                       tangible things at a place within 100

28                       miles of where the person resides, is

29                       employed, or regularly transacts

30                       business in person; and




                                                         Rules Appendix D - Page 17
                                FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE                         3




                   31                       (B)     inspection of premises at the premises

                   32                               to be inspected.

                   33                                  *****

                   34                             Committee Note

                   35                In 2013, Rule 45(a)(2) was amended to provide that
                   36        a subpoena must issue from the court where the action is
                   37        pending, and Rule 45(b)(2) now provides that such a
                   38        subpoena can be served at any place within the United
                   39        States.

                   40                Since the 2013 amendments, however, some courts
                   41        have concluded that they are without authority to command
                   42        witnesses to provide remote trial testimony because the
                   43        witnesses are not within the “subpoena power” of the
                   44        presiding court. See, e.g., In re Kirkland, 75 F.4th 1030 (9th
                   45        Cir. 2023) (holding that a subpoena can compel remote trial
                   46        testimony from a witness only if the witness resides or
                   47        transacts business in person within 100 miles of the court or
                   48        within the state in which the court sits). Questions have also
                   49        been raised about whether a subpoena can compel a nonparty
                   50        to provide discovery if the nonparty witness is located
                   51        outside the geographical scope of the subpoena power to
                   52        command the witness to appear in court. See, e.g., York
                   53        Holding, Inc. v. Waid, 345 F.R.D. 626 (D. Nev. 2024)
                   54        (rejecting the argument that a Nevada district court subpoena
                   55        could not command production of documents within 100
                   56        miles of the nonparty’s place of business in New
                   57        Hampshire).

                   58               This amendment clarifies that the court’s subpoena
                   59        power for in-court testimony or to provide discovery extends
                   60        nationwide so long as a subpoena does not command the




Rules Appendix D - Page 18
     4           FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE




61   witness to travel farther than the distance authorized under
62   Rule 45(c)(1), which provides protections against undue
63   burdens on persons subject to subpoenas. It specifies that,
64   for purposes of Rule 45(c)(1), the witness “attends” at the
65   place where the person must appear to provide the remote
66   testimony. For purposes of Rule 43 and Rule 77(b), such
67   remote testimony occurs in the court where the trial or
68   hearing is conducted.

69          The amendment does not alter the standards for
70   deciding whether to permit in-court remote trial testimony.
71   Instead, it applies to any subpoena for witness testimony.
72   Rule 43(a) authorizes remote trial testimony but depends on
73   court permission for such testimony.

74          When a subpoena commands a witness to provide
75   remote testimony, it is the responsibility of the serving party
76   to ensure that the necessary technology is available at the
77   remote location for such testimony.




                                                             Rules Appendix D - Page 19
                               PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE FEDERAL
                                    RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE1


                     1       Rule 81.       Applicability of the Rules in General;
                     2                      Removed Actions

                     3                                    *****

                     4       (c)    Removed Actions.

                     5              (1)        Applicability. These rules apply to a civil

                     6                         action after it is removed from a state court.

                     7                                     *****

                     8              (3)        Demand for a Jury Trial.

                     9                         (A)     Before Removal As Affected by State

                   10                                  Law. A party who, before removal,

                   11                                  expressly demanded a jury trial in

                   12                                  accordance with state law need not

                   13                                  renew the demand after removal.

                   14                          (B)     After Removal. If no demand has been

                   15                                  made before removal, Rule 38(b)


                                    1
                                        New material is underlined; matter to be omitted is lined
                             through.




Rules Appendix D - Page 20
     2   FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE




16               governs a demand for a jury trial. If

17               all necessary pleadings have been

18               served at the time of removal, a party

19               entitled to a jury trial under Rule

20               38(b) must be given one if the party

21               serves a demand within 14 days after:

22               If the state law did not require an

23               express demand for a jury trial, a

24               party need not make one after

25               removal unless the court orders the

26               parties to do so within a specified

27               time. The court must so order at a

28               party’s request and may so order on

29               its own. A party who fails to make a

30               demand when so ordered waives a

31               jury trial.

32         (B)   Under Rule 38. If all necessary

33               pleadings have been served at the




                                                Rules Appendix D - Page 21
                             FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE                               3




                   34                               time of removal, a party entitled to a

                   35                               jury trial under Rule 38 must be given

                   36                               one if the party serves a demand

                   37                               within 14 days after:

                   38                               (i)      it files a notice of removal; or

                   39                               (ii)     it is served with a notice of

                   40                                        removal filed by another

                   41                                        party.

                   42                                      *****

                   43                              Committee Note

                   44                 Rule 81(c) is amended to remove uncertainty about
                   45        when and whether a party to a removed action must demand
                   46        a jury trial. Prior to 2007, the rule said no demand was
                   47        necessary if the state court “does” not require a jury demand
                   48        to obtain a jury trial. State practice on jury demands varies,
                   49        and it appears that in at least some state courts no demand
                   50        need be made, although it is uncertain whether those states
                   51        actually guarantee a jury trial unless the parties affirmatively
                   52        waive jury trial. In other state courts, a jury demand is
                   53        required, but only later in the case than the deadline in Rule
                   54        38 for demanding a jury trial. A number of states have rules
                   55        similar to Rule 38, but time limits for making a jury demand
                   56        differ from the time limit in Rule 38.

                   57               This amendment is designed to remove uncertainty
                   58        about whether and when a jury demand must be made after




Rules Appendix D - Page 22
     4           FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE




59   removal. It explicitly preserves the right to jury trial of a
60   party that expressly demanded a jury trial before removal.
61   But otherwise it makes clear that Rule 38 applies to removed
62   cases. If all pleadings have been served at the time of
63   removal, the demand must be made by the removing party
64   within 14 days of the date on which it filed its notice of
65   removal, and by any other party within 14 days of the date
66   on which it was served with a notice of removal. If further
67   pleadings are required, Rule 38(b)(1) applies to the removed
68   case.

69           When no demand has been made either before
70   removal or in compliance with Rule 38(b), the court has
71   discretion under Rule 39(b), on motion, to order a jury trial
72   on any issue for which a jury trial might have been
73   demanded.

74           The amendment removes the prior exemption from
75   the jury demand requirement in cases removed from state
76   courts in which an express demand for a jury trial is not
77   required. Courts no longer have to order parties to cases
78   removed from such state courts to make a jury demand; the
79   rule so requires.




                                                           Rules Appendix D - Page 23
              Excerpt from the May 6, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Civil Rules



                         COMMITTEE ON RULES OF PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
                                                     OF THE
                                JUDICIAL CONFERENCE OF THE UNITED STATES
                                           WASHINGTON, D.C. 20544


JAMES C. DEVER III                                                               CHAIRS OF ADVISORY COMMITTEES
     CHAIR
                                                                                           ALLISON H. EID
CAROLYN A. DUBAY                                                                          APPELLATE RULES
   SECRETARY
                                                                                       REBECCA B. CONNELLY
                                                                                        BANKRUPTCY RULES

                                                                                          SARAH S. VANCE
                                                                                            CIVIL RULES

                                                                                        MICHAEL W. MOSMAN
                                                                                          CRIMINAL RULES

                                                                                          JESSE M. FURMAN
                                                                                           EVIDENCE RULES



                                             MEMORANDUM *

   TO:               Hon. James C. Dever III, Chair
                     Committee on Rules of Practice and Procedure

   FROM:             Hon. Sarah S. Vance, Chair
                     Advisory Committee on Civil Rules

   RE:               Report of the Advisory Committee on Civil Rules

   DATE:       May 6, 2026
   _____________________________________________________________________________

                                                 Introduction

           The Civil Rules Advisory Committee met in Charlotte, N.C., on April 14, 2026. Members
   of the public attended in person, and public online attendance was also provided. * * * For the
   convenience of Standing Committee members, the entire agenda book for that Advisory
   Committee meeting may be accessed via the link below. This report will on occasion refer to parts
   of that agenda book as a source of additional information.

                                Civil Rules Committee Agenda Book (April 2026)

   *
    A copy of the full committee report can be found in the June 2026 Standing Committee agenda book
   publicly available on www.uscourts.gov.



   Rules Appendix D - Page 24
          Excerpt from the May 6, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Civil Rules


        As authorized by the Standing Committee, proposed amendments to Civil Rules 7.1, 26,
41, 45(b), 45(c), and 81 were published for public comment in August 2025, and a public hearing
was held on January 27, 2026. The above link provides access to the summaries of public
comments and testimony about the various amendments, and the report below identifies the pages
of the Advisory Committee agenda book on which those summaries can be found.

        Part I of this agenda book presents the six action items the Advisory Committee is bringing
forward—the six rule changes listed above. The Advisory Committee unanimously voted to
recommend that all rule changes listed above should be approved for final adoption. Small
clarifying changes were made in the Committee Notes for two of the rule changes.

                                             *****

I.     ACTION ITEMS

       (a)     Rule 7.1—Disclosure Statement

        The Rule 7.1 Subcommittee, chaired by Justice Jane Bland of the Supreme Court of Texas,
was created in spring 2023 to address concerns that district judges were not being adequately
informed of potential financial interests in a proceeding that would require them to recuse. In
particular, there was a concern that the current rule’s requirement that a party disclose “any parent
corporation and any publicly held corporation owning 10% or more of its stock” obscured the
identity of a “grandparent” or “great-grandparent” of a party in which a judge might hold a
financial interest.

        The proposed amendment, which was published in August 2025, changes the rule in two
ways: (1) it replaces references to “a corporate party” with the broader term “business
organizations”; and (2) it requires disclosure of both “a parent business organization” and “any
publicly held business organization that directly or indirectly owns 10% or more” of a party. These
changes track guidance issued to federal judges by the Codes of Conduct Committee in February
2024 and language in the committee note of the analogous Federal Rule of Appellate Procedure
requiring a similar disclosure, Rule 26.1, which for decades has covered grandparents and great-
grandparents.

       The public-comment period yielded relatively little reaction: four witnesses at the hearing
and eight written submissions, summarized at pages 96-97 of the Advisory Committee’s April
2026 agenda book. Although one witness expressed concerns that the definitions of “business
organizations” and “indirectly owns” might be confusing, all other comments were supportive and
expressed confidence that these amendments are not onerous and will make it easier for judges to
determine whether they have any financial interest in the outcome of the litigation that requires
them to recuse. The subcommittee reviewed all of the testimony and written comments and
unanimously recommended final approval of the rule with no changes to the rule or the note. At
its April meeting, the Advisory Committee agreed, unanimously voting to recommend final
adoption of the amended rule and note with no changes.




                                                                              Rules Appendix D - Page 25
           Excerpt from the May 6, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Civil Rules


         (b)      Rule 41(a)—Dismissal Without Prejudice

         The Rule 41(a) Subcommittee, chaired by Judge Cathy Bissoon (W.D. Pa.), was created at
the March 2022 Advisory Committee meeting to address varying interpretations of the rule
permitting voluntary dismissal of “actions.” Despite the language of the rule, many courts allow
parties to use it to dismiss less than an entire action—for instance, all claims against one of several
parties or even one of several claims against an individual party. The reason for this divergence
between the language of the rule and its use became clear: in a world where multiparty, multiclaim
litigation is far more typical than 1938 (when the current language was drafted) it enhances
efficiency to allow the court and parties to narrow the issues involved in a litigation by dismissing
individual claims.

        After extensive research and outreach, the subcommittee proposed two amendments to the
rule for publication: (1) replace references to an “action” to “one or more claims”; and (2) require
that only parties who “remain in the action” sign a stipulation of dismissal to solve a different
problem involving challenges created by the inability to obtain a signature from a party who has
long departed the litigation.

        These proposed amendments were published for comment in August 2025. During the
public comment period, three witnesses testified, and the Advisory Committee received 28 written
comments. All testimony and feedback were in favor of the amendments and are summarized at
pages 106-110 of the April 2026 agenda book. Themes emerging from the public comments
include praise for the amendments’ resolution of the varying interpretations across the circuits of
the word “action” and confidence that the amendments will increase efficiency and reduce
confusion. There were three suggested minor tweaks to the language of the rule that the
subcommittee discussed via email and concluded were unwarranted. The subcommittee therefore
recommended final adoption of the amended rule and note at the April Advisory Committee
meeting, and the Advisory Committee agreed. It unanimously recommended final approval of the
published draft without changes.

         (c)      Rule 45(c)—Subpoena for Remote Trial Testimony

        The preliminary draft of the Rule 45(c) amendment was published for public comment in
August 2025, with comment closing in February 2026. On March 11, the Rule 43/45
Subcommittee met to discuss the public comments. Except for a modification of one paragraph of
the committee note, the subcommittee saw no need to make other changes. Notes of that meeting
are at pages 124-25 of the April 2026 agenda book via the link above.

        The principal goal of this Rule 45(c) amendment proposal was to change the outcome in
the Ninth Circuit’s In re Kirkland panel decision, which held that current Rule 45 would not permit
a subpoena to require a witness to provide remote trial testimony even though the court had found
that the requirements of Rule 43(a) were satisfied in the case. See In re Kirkland, 75 F.4th 1030
(9th Cir. 2023). The Ninth Circuit panel held that the rule did not, as written, authorize a subpoena
for such remote trial testimony, but it also recognized that a rule change would solve the problem
and undo the panel’s interpretation.




Rules Appendix D - Page 26
               Excerpt from the May 6, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Civil Rules


            Though at least some witnesses opposed that change on the merits (including the lawyer
    who persuaded the Ninth Circuit panel to adopt its interpretation of the current rule), many more
    favored the change. The subcommittee saw no reason to reconsider the rule change, and noted that
    there is considerable urgency about responding to the Ninth Circuit decision.

           The subcommittee’s discussion during its March 11 meeting indicated that only one change
    was needed in the published preliminary draft—refinement of the next-to-last paragraph of the
    note. There was concern that the wording of the published draft of the note suggests that the
    Rule 43(a) standard for remote testimony at trial also applies to motion hearings or other
    proceedings. So the Subcommittee recommended that the next to last paragraph of the committee
    note be clarified as follows:

1           The amendment does not alter the standards for deciding whether to permit in-court
2           remote trial testimony. Instead, it applies to any subpoena for witness testimony.
3           Ordinarily, court approval is required for remote testimony in court. Rule 43(a), for
4           example, authorizes remote trial testimony in trials and hearings but depends on
5           court permission for such testimony. Rule 26(a)(3)(A)(i) requires that the parties
6           disclose the identities of witnesses whose testimony will be presented, without
7           distinguishing between in-person and remote testimony. 1 Even remote deposition
8           testimony is authorized only by stipulation or court order. See Rule 30(b)(4).

            Without this clarification, the published draft note might be read to limit the court’s present
    latitude to hold remote proceedings that are not trials. The basic point of the paragraph is that
    remote trial testimony—the only thing regulated by Rule 43(a)—requires court approval. Other
    remote activities—court proceedings or depositions—are not affected by this amendment and
    referring to them might create confusion. This clarification avoids that potential confusion.

           The subcommittee and later the full Advisory Committee considered various other
    proposed wording changes made by some who commented on the rule amendment. The summary
    of public comments and testimony about this rule appear at pages 126-33 of the Advisory
    Committee agenda book. Notes of the subcommittee’s March 22, 2026, meeting appear at pages
    124-25 of the agenda book.

           Some who commented did not oppose the Rule 45(c) change, but thought it should not be
    made until the question of possibly amending Rule 43(a) on remote trial testimony was resolved.
    But the Ninth Circuit decision has already been invoked to resist subpoenas for pretrial discovery,
    and there is no necessary link to the ongoing consideration of amending Rule 43(a). There were
    also some wording changes proposed that are identified at pages 113-15 of the Advisory
    Committee agenda book accessible via the link above.




    1
     After the Advisory Committee’s meeting, this sentence (which was not removed when other deletions were made
    to this paragraph of the committee note during that meeting) was overstricken. It is not about the interpretation of
    Rule 45(c), and the Rule 26(a)(3) amendment speaks for itself. Removing this sentence shortens the note and avoids
    any possible confusion including this sentence might cause.



                                                                                               Rules Appendix D - Page 27
           Excerpt from the May 6, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Civil Rules


       After discussion, the Advisory Committee unanimously voted to recommend final
adoption of the published rule change with the change noted above to one paragraph of the
committee note.

         (d)      Rule 26(a)(3)(A) Amendment—Disclosure of Intention to Offer Remote Trial
                  Testimony

        The Rule 26(a)(3) amendment directs the parties not only to identify the witnesses they
intend to call or will call if needed at trial, but also to indicate whether any of these witnesses will
offer remote testimony.

         The proposed amendment attracted little comment. The summary of the comments appears
at pages 141-42 of the Advisory Committee’s agenda book for its April 2026 meeting. The
clarification amendment makes clear that disclosure of the witnesses a party “expects to present”
at trial or that it “may call if the need arises” must specify whether the witness is expected to
provide remote testimony. Given the requirement of court approval for remote trial testimony
under Rule 43(a), this revision may often ensure notice to the court and the other parties of the
need to address that question of court permission for remote testimony.

     The Advisory Committee voted unanimously to recommend final adoption of the proposed
amendment as published.

         (e)      Rule 45(b)(1)—Manner of Service of Subpoena

        The proposed amendment sought to clarify what is required to satisfy the current rule’s
provision that serving a subpoena calls for “delivering a copy to the named person.” The current
rule has engendered uncertainty about what suffices to serve a subpoena. The proposed amendment
borrows service methods authorized for service of the summons and complaint under
Rule 4(e)(2)(A) and (B) and adds another authorized method—service by U.S. mail or a
commercial-carrier service that provides confirmation of actual receipt. The amendment also
explicitly empowers the court to authorize additional methods of service in given cases.

       In addition, the amendment provides a 14-day notice period for subpoenas that require the
person to appear for a deposition or a trial (absent a court order shortening the period). It also
removes the requirement that the witness fee be tendered at the same time the subpoena is served,
providing that delivery of the witness fee “at the time and place the person is commanded to
appear” would suffice.

       This amendment received numerous comments during the public comment period, many
from professional process servers who opposed the amendment. A summary of the comments and
testimony appears at pages 160-83 of the Advisory Committee’s April 2026 agenda book,
accessible via the link at the beginning of this report.

        After the public comment period closed, the Discovery Subcommittee met and decided that
the issues raised during the public comment period did not warrant changes in the published draft.
Notes of this meeting appear at pages 154-59 of the Advisory Committee’s agenda book.




Rules Appendix D - Page 28
               Excerpt from the May 6, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Civil Rules


            During the Advisory Committee’s April meeting, a number of questions were raised about
     the amendment. One was about the proposed language of Rule 45(b)(1)(A)(i)—“delivering a copy
     to the named person personally.” Rule 5(b)(2)(A) says “handing it to the person.” But
     Rule 4(e)(2)(A), on which this amendment is based, calls for delivering the summons and
     complaint “to the individual personally,” which the amendment parallels.

             Other concerns were raised about the added methods of service added in proposed
     45(b)(1)(A)(iii)—by U.S. Mail or commercial carrier. The rule calls for “confirmation of actual
     receipt.” It was pointed out that the committee note mentioned Rule 45(b)(4) regarding proof of
     service, which calls for a “statement . . . certified by the server.” That might prove difficult with
     U.S. mail or a commercial carrier. An additional concern was raised by Advisory Committee
     discussion—assuming confirmation of receipt, who must receive the subpoena? The committee
     note does not clearly answer that question.

             The Discovery Subcommittee caucused during the lunch break at the April 14 Advisory
     Committee meeting and after lunch proposed changes to the third paragraph of the committee note
     as follows:

 9          The amendment also adds another option—service by United States mail or
10          commercial carrier to the person’s last known address, if the selected method
11          provides confirmation of actual receipt by a person identified in Rule 45(b)(1)(A)(i)
12          or (ii). The rule does not prescribe the exact means of confirmation, but courts
13          should be alert to ensuring that there is reliable confirmation of actual receipt. Cf.
14          Rule 45(b)(4) (proving service of subpoena). Experience has shown that this
15          method regularly works and is reliable.

     These changes clarify that the person who receives the subpoena is one of those on whom service
     would be authorized, and also removed the possibly confusing cf. citation to Rule 45(b)(4).

            The subcommittee also decided that, given the parallelism between the new provisions in
     Rule 45(b)(1) and the service provisions from Rule 4(e), the published rule language “delivering
     a copy to the person personally” was clear.

             The Advisory Committee unanimously voted to recommend final adoption of the
     Rule 45(b)(1) amendment as published for public comment, with the sole revision quoted above
     to the committee note.

            (f)     Rule 81(c)(3)—Demand for Jury Trial After Removal

            The proposed amendment to Rule 81(c)(3) clarifies the timing of demands for jury trial in
     removed cases. If a demand has been made before removal, no further demand need be made. But
     if no demand has been made before removal, the amendment specifies when a demand under
     Rule 38 must be made within the time limits in that rule.

            The amendment eliminates the uncertainty caused by the provision in the current rule that
     excuses a jury demand if “state law did not require an express demand for jury trial.”




                                                                                   Rules Appendix D - Page 29
           Excerpt from the May 6, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Civil Rules


        The proposed amendment received only a few comments, all positive. See Agenda Book
for Advisory Committee on Civil Rules, April 14, 2026, at 192. It might be noted that one of the
comments supporting the rule change came from the presidents of the Trial Lawyers Associations
of 48 states and said the proposed rule changes added clarity to the rule by replacing the current
rule, which creates confusion.

       The Advisory Committee unanimously voted to recommend final adoption of the
Rule 81(c) amendment as published for public comment.

                                            *****




Rules Appendix D - Page 30
                                                                 Agenda E-19 (Appendix E)
                                                                                   Rules
                                                                          September 2026




       PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE FEDERAL
          RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE1


 1   Rule 17.              Subpoena

 2   (a)        ContentIn General. A subpoena must state the

 3              court’s name and the proceeding’s title of the

 4              proceeding, include the court’s seal of the court, and

 5              command require that the witness recipient to attend

 6              and testify—at the a specified time and place—

 7              attend and testify, produce designated items, or do

 8              both the subpoena specifies. The clerk must issue a

 9              blank subpoena—signed and sealed—to the party

10              requesting it, and that party, who must fill in the

11              blanks before the subpoena is served.

12   (b)        Subpoena to Testify—Defendant Unable to Pay

13              Costs and Witness Fees. Upon a defendant’s ex

14              parte application, the court must order that a




                1
                    New material is underlined; matter to be omitted is lined
     through.




                                                                           Rules Appendix E - Page 1
                            2           FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE




                    15            subpoena be issued for a named witness if the

                    16            defendant shows an inability to pay the witness’s fees

                    17            and the necessity of the witness’s presence for an

                    18            adequate defense. If the court orders a subpoena to

                    19            be issued, the and an inability to pay the witness’s

                    20            fees. The process costs and witness fees will then be

                    21            paid in the same manner as those paid they are for

                    22            witnesses the responding to government subpoenas.

                    23      (c)   Producing Documents and Subpoena to Produce

                    24            Data, Objects, or Other Items.

                    25            (1)    In General—Items Obtainable. A subpoena

                    26                   may order require the witness recipient to

                    27                   produce any books, papers, documents, item,

                    28                   including any data or information or any

                    29                   book, paper, document, or other objects the

                    30                   subpoena designates object. The court may

                    31                   direct the witness to produce the designated

                    32                   items in court before trial or before they are




Rules Appendix E - Page 2
     FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE                          3




33              to be offered in evidence. When the items

34              arrive, the court may permit the parties and

35              their attorneys to inspect all or part of them.

36        (2)   Quashing or Modifying the Subpoena. On

37              motion made promptly, the court may quash

38              or modify the subpoena if compliance would

39              be unreasonable or oppressive. Non-Grand-

40              Jury Subpoena—When Available;

41              Required Content and Limitations;

42              Issuance; Disclosure.

43              (A)     When Available. A non-grand-jury

44                      subpoena is available for a trial; for a

45                      hearing on detention, suppression,

46                      sentencing, or revocation; or—with

47                      the   court’s    permission     in      an

48                      individual case—for any additional

49                      evidentiary hearing.




                                                             Rules Appendix E - Page 3
                            4   FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE




                    50           (B)   Required Content and Limitations.

                    51                 The subpoena must describe each

                    52                 designated item with reasonable

                    53                 particularity and require production

                    54                 of only items that:

                    55                 (i)     are likely to be possessed by

                    56                         the subpoena’s recipient;

                    57                 (ii)    are not reasonably available to

                    58                         the party from another source;

                    59                         and

                    60                 (iii)   are, or contain information

                    61                         that is, likely to be admissible

                    62                         as evidence in the designated

                    63                         proceeding.

                    64           (C)   Motion and Order Not Ordinarily

                    65                 Required. A motion and order are not

                    66                 required before service of a non-

                    67                 grand-jury subpoena unless (c)(3) or




Rules Appendix E - Page 4
     FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE                         5




68                    (4), a local rule, or a court order

69                    requires them.

70              (D)   Necessary Showing In a Required

71                    Motion. The movant must:

72                    (i)     describe each designated item

73                            with reasonable particularity;

74                            and

75                    (ii)    state facts showing that each

76                            item satisfies (2)(B) (i)-(iii).

77              (E)   Ex-Parte Motion. The court must, for

78                    good cause, permit the party to file

79                    the motion ex parte.

80              (F)   Disclosure When No Motion Is

81                    Required.     When     no    motion        is

82                    required, a party need not disclose to

83                    any other party that it is seeking or has

84                    served the subpoena, unless a local




                                                         Rules Appendix E - Page 5
                            6         FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE




                    85                        rule   or    court   order   provides

                    86                        otherwise.

                    87          (3)    Non-Grand-Jury Subpoena for Personal or

                    88                 Confidential Information About a Victim.

                    89                 (A)    Motion and Order Required. After a

                    90                        complaint, indictment, or information

                    91                        is filed, a non-grand-jury subpoena

                    92                        requiring the production of personal

                    93                        or confidential information about a

                    94                        victim may be served on a third party,

                    95                        including a victim, only by court

                    96                        order upon motion.

                    97                 (B)    Notice to a Victim. Before entering

                    98                        the order and uUnless there are

                    99                        exceptional circumstances, the court

                  100                         must, before entering the order,

                  101                         require giving notice to the victim so

                  102                         that the victim can move to quash or




Rules Appendix E - Page 6
      FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE                          7




103                     modify the subpoena or otherwise

104                     object.

105        (4)   Subpoena by a Self-Represented Party. A

106              subpoena is available to a self-represented

107              party only after the party:

108              (A)    files a motion;

109              (B)    makes the showing described in

110                     (2)(D); and

111              (C)    obtains an order.

112        (5)   Non-Grand-Jury         Subpoena—Place            to

113              Produce the Designated Items. Unless the

114              court orders otherwise, a non-grand-jury

115              subpoena:

116              (A)    must require the recipient to produce

117                     the designated items to the court if the

118                     subpoena:

119                     (i)       is   requested   by     a    self-

120                               represented party; or




                                                              Rules Appendix E - Page 7
                            8         FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE




                  121                         (ii)   requires the production of

                  122                                personal         or     confidential

                  123                                information about a victim;

                  124                                and

                  125                  (B)    may require the recipient to produce

                  126                         the designated items to the requesting

                  127                         party’s counsel if the subpoena:

                  128                         (i)    is requested by a represented

                  129                                party; and

                  130                         (ii)   does       not        require   the

                  131                                production of personal or

                  132                                confidential            information

                  133                                about a victim.

                  134           (6)    Disclosing to Other Parties the Items

                  135                  Produced. This rule does not require the

                  136                  disclosure of produced items to a party that

                  137                  did not request the subpoena. Disclosure and




Rules Appendix E - Page 8
      FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE                       9




138                discovery requirements are not altered by this

139                rule.

140         (7)    Quashing or Modifying the Subpoena. On

141                motion made promptly, the court may quash

142                or modify the subpoena if compliance would

143                be unreasonable or oppressive. A party

144                responding to a motion to quash a non-grand-

145                jury subpoena must make the showing

146                described in (2)(D).

147   (d)   Service. A marshal, a deputy marshal, or any

148         nonparty who is at least 18 years old may serve a

149         subpoena. The server must deliver a copy of the

150         subpoena to the witness or to the subpoena’s

151         recipient and must tender to the witness one day’s

152         witness-attendance fee and the legal mileage

153         allowance. But tThe server need not tender the

154         attendance fee or mileage allowance when if the




                                                           Rules Appendix E - Page 9
                             10          FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE




                  155              United States, a federal officer, or a federal agency

                  156              has requested the subpoena.

                  157        (e)   Place of Service.

                  158              (1)    In the United States. A subpoena requiring a

                  159                     witness to attend a hearing or trial—or

                  160                     requiring a recipient to produce designated

                  161                     items—may be served at any place within the

                  162                     United States.

                  163              (2)    In a Foreign Country. If the witness is in a

                  164                     foreign country, 28 U.S.C. § 1783 governs

                  165                     the subpoena’s service.

                  166        (f)   Issuing Subpoena for a Deposition Subpoena.

                  167              (1)    Issuance. A court order to take a deposition

                  168                     authorizes the clerk in the district where the

                  169                     deposition is to be taken to issue a subpoena

                  170                     for any witness named or described in the

                  171                     order.




Rules Appendix E - Page 10
      FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE                      11




172         (2)    Place. After considering the convenience of

173                the witness and the parties, the court may

174                order—and the subpoena may require—the

175                witness to appear anywhere the court

176                designates.

177   (g)   Contempt Order for Disobeying a Subpoena. The

178         court (other than a magistrate judge) may hold in

179         contempt a witness or subpoena recipient who,

180         without adequate excuse, disobeys a subpoena issued

181         by a federal court in that district. A Under 28 U.S.C.

182         § 636(e), a magistrate judge may hold in contempt a

183         witness or subpoena recipient who, without adequate

184         excuse, disobeys a subpoena issued by that

185         magistrate judge as provided in 28 U.S.C. § 636(e).

186   (h)   Information Not Subject to a Subpoena. No party

187         may subpoena a statement of a witness or of a

188         prospective witness under this rule. Rule 26.2

189         governs the production of the statement.




                                                           Rules Appendix E - Page 11
                             12          FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE




                  190                             Committee Note

                  191                 The amendments to Rule 17 respond to gaps and
                  192        ambiguities in its text that have contributed to conflicting
                  193        interpretations in the courts and difficulties in application.
                  194        The changes include revisions that clarify the procedures for
                  195        subpoenas to produce data, objects, or other items and the
                  196        availability of such subpoenas for proceedings other than
                  197        trial, as well as revisions that delineate which provisions
                  198        apply to certain types of subpoenas. The amendments also
                  199        include stylistic revisions to text and headings.

                  200               Rule 17(a). In addition to stylistic changes, the text
                  201        in (a)(1) has been revised to clarify that it applies to
                  202        subpoenas for producing items as well as those for
                  203        testimony.

                  204               Rule 17(b) formerly headed “Defendant Unable to
                  205        Pay,” has been retitled to clarify that it applies only to
                  206        subpoenas for testimony. Changes to the text are stylistic
                  207        only.

                  208                Rule 17(c), covering subpoenas to produce data,
                  209        objects, or other items, has been revised to address multiple
                  210        issues with the prior language that had contributed to
                  211        conflicting interpretations in the courts. Formerly it had
                  212        three subsections, now it has seven. The changes are
                  213        intended to promote clarity about what the Rule requires,
                  214        while safeguarding the discretion of courts to tailor subpoena
                  215        practice to the circumstances of a district or case. The
                  216        section’s heading —“Subpoena to Produce Information,
                  217        Objects, or Other Items”—has been revised to more
                  218        accurately describe the amended language in (c)(1).

                  219               Rule 17(c)(1) continues to describe what a subpoena
                  220        may obtain, but it has been revised to refer to “items” that
                  221        include not only data, but also any “information” or objects.




Rules Appendix E - Page 12
      FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE                         13




222   This recognizes that parties use subpoenas to obtain
223   electronically stored information and other intangible items
224   in addition to “data,” “documents” or other objects.

225           Perceived ambiguities in the language of the last two
226   sentences of former (c)(1) contributed to several conflicts in
227   case law, including when a subpoena may be sought ex parte,
228   and the rules for production and disclosure. The revised rule
229   replaces these two sentences with separate provisions
230   containing explicit direction about each of these issues.

231           Rule 17(c)(2) is new. The language formerly in (c)(2)
232   about motions to quash is now (c)(7). Subparagraph (2)(A)
233   clarifies that non-grand-jury subpoenas are available to
234   produce items for trial as well as proceedings where
235   subpoenas are most likely to be needed, presently used
236   regularly in many districts, or for which there is statutory or
237   rule authority for parties to present evidence: detention
238   hearings under the Bail Reform Act, sentencing hearings
239   under Rule 32, pre-trial suppression hearings, and
240   revocations. There is no other mechanism available to
241   compel evidence from third parties at these proceedings,
242   even though both parties may need to do so. Some decisions
243   have interpreted the prior text of the Rule to bar the use of
244   Rule 17 subpoenas to produce items at any hearing other
245   than grand jury proceedings and trial. This change to the
246   Rule’s text expressly authorizes the use of a non-grand-jury
247   subpoena to obtain evidence for introduction at the listed
248   hearings.

249           The    ending clause explicitly recognizes the
250   discretion of the court in an individual case to permit a
251   Rule 17 subpoena to produce items in other evidentiary
252   hearings not listed in the Rule in which a party may be
253   allowed to present witnesses or evidence. Examples include
254   preliminary hearings and new trial hearings. The present use




                                                              Rules Appendix E - Page 13
                             14          FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE




                  255        of Rule 17 subpoenas for items in such proceedings is not as
                  256        common, in part because of the difficulties, costs, and delays
                  257        that may arise when subpoena practice is imported into these
                  258        less formal or more expedited proceedings.

                  259                Rule 17’s provisions are not applicable to hearings
                  260        under § 2254, where a court may apply subpoena provisions
                  261        in the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. See Rule 12 of the
                  262        Rules Governing § 2254 Proceedings. Rule 12 of the Rules
                  263        Governing § 2255 Proceedings allows application of either
                  264        the Civil or Criminal Rules in § 2255 proceedings.

                  265                 Subparagraph (c)(2)(B), along with the
                  266        requirements in (c)(2)(D), articulates a modified version of
                  267        the test announced by the Supreme Court in Nixon v. United
                  268        States, 418 U.S. 683 (1974), which interpreted the previous
                  269        text of Rule 17. Applying Nixon, all but a handful of lower
                  270        courts have read Rule 17 as limiting non-grand-jury
                  271        subpoenas to produce documents or other items to those that
                  272        met specificity, relevance, and admissibility requirements.
                  273        Many courts added one or more of the additional following
                  274        criteria: that the items sought were not otherwise obtainable
                  275        by due diligence, that advance inspection was needed to
                  276        properly prepare and avoid delay, and that the subpoena was
                  277        not a “fishing expedition.”

                  278                The Committee agreed that the basic character of
                  279        Rule 17 subpoenas as seeking evidence for a particular
                  280        proceeding should remain unchanged, and that the rule
                  281        should continue to prohibit the use of subpoenas for general
                  282        discovery from third parties. But it also determined that the
                  283        admissibility requirement, as well as other aspects of the
                  284        prevailing interpretation of the prior language, was being
                  285        applied inconsistently, resulting in harmful uncertainty and
                  286        unnecessarily restricted access to evidence needed from
                  287        third parties for trial and other proceedings.




Rules Appendix E - Page 14
      FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE                         15




288           The new text now codifies a modified version of the
289   Nixon standard intended to provide an adequate and more
290   predictable opportunity for both the prosecution and defense
291   to obtain from third parties the evidence they need for the
292   proceeding designated in the subpoena. The new text
293   imposes upon a party the duty to ensure that every subpoena
294   to produce items meets this standard, including those
295   obtained and served without motion.

296            As to specificity and the prevention of “fishing
297   expeditions,” (c)(2)(B) first requires that the subpoena
298   “describe each designated item with reasonable
299   particularity.” This requirement serves at least two functions.
300   First, it informs the recipient what is being requested so that
301   the recipient can decide how to comply and whether to file a
302   motion to quash. Second, it prevents parties from using such
303   subpoenas for discovery and “fishing expeditions,” which
304   can create unacceptable burdens for recipients, courts, and
305   those individuals and entities whose information the
306   recipient is ordered to produce. The requirements in
307   (c)(2)(B)(i) and (ii) advance this same goal by limiting the
308   subpoena to items “likely to be possessed by the subpoena’s
309   recipient,” and “not reasonably available to the party from
310   another source.”

311           The text of (c)(2)(B)(iii) requires that each item
312   either be, or contain information that is, “likely to be
313   admissible as evidence in the designated proceeding.” In
314   using “likely to be admissible,” the Committee deliberately
315   rejected stricter formulations applied by some courts. In
316   some circumstances, it will be impossible to be certain
317   before a proceeding begins that a precisely identified item
318   will be admissible. Such circumstances include when an
319   item’s admissibility depends on whether the opposing party
320   first presents other evidence. For example, impeachment
321   evidence should be available to a party by subpoena for use




                                                              Rules Appendix E - Page 15
                             16           FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE




                  322        at trial when a party knows that a witness will or is likely to
                  323        testify. That evidence should not be unavailable simply
                  324        because admissibility cannot be determined definitively
                  325        until after the witness has actually testified. The “likely to be
                  326        admissible” standard is already used by some courts
                  327        applying Rule 17 and more accurately describes the
                  328        appropriate inquiry. There is no separate reference to
                  329        “relevance” in (c)(2)(B) because information would not be
                  330        admissible unless it were relevant.

                  331                If a court is concerned that without judicial oversight
                  332        some categories of subpoenas—such as those seeking
                  333        particular types of information, or seeking information for a
                  334        particular type of proceeding—pose a special risk of
                  335        noncompliance with the requirements in (c)(2)(B), the court
                  336        has discretion to require that those subpoenas be authorized
                  337        by court order upon motion (see (c)(2)(C)) and/or to order
                  338        that the recipient produce the items to the court instead of
                  339        directly to the requesting party’s counsel (see (c)(5)).

                  340                The provisions in Subparagraphs (c)(2)(C)-(F)
                  341        resolve several disputed issues about obtaining subpoenas to
                  342        produce items that arose under the prior language of the
                  343        Rule.

                  344                Rule 17(c)(2)(C) defines when a motion and court
                  345        order are required before a party may serve a non-grand-jury
                  346        subpoena to produce items. Courts have disagreed about if
                  347        or when the former language in (c)(1)—which stated “the
                  348        court may direct the witness to produce the designated items
                  349        in court before trial or before they are offered in evidence”—
                  350        required a court to first approve a subpoena under 17(c). The
                  351        resulting practice has differed greatly from court to court
                  352        (and in some cases judge to judge), with some courts
                  353        requiring motions for every subpoena to produce items,
                  354        others permitting parties to obtain and serve such subpoenas




Rules Appendix E - Page 16
      FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE                         17




355   without judicial involvement (unless the subpoena sought
356   victim information under (c)(3)), and still others insisting on
357   prior approval in certain circumstances but not others.

358           The Committee concluded that mandating a motion
359   and court order for every subpoena to produce items—or for
360   every subpoena that seeks production before trial, as some
361   courts had interpreted the former language in (a)—places
362   unnecessary burdens on courts and parties alike and is
363   contrary to existing practice in many districts. Other
364   requirements stated in the Rule or otherwise available to the
365   court, such as protective orders, are adequate to control
366   potential abuse of the subpoena process by the parties.
367   Districts that have required, under the prior language of the
368   rule, a motion and court order whenever a subpoena seeks
369   production prior to trial may continue that practice by local
370   rule or court order. That level of judicial oversight before
371   service, however, is no longer required by the revised text of
372   the Rule.

373           The amended rule clearly specifies the circumstances
374   that will always require prior court approval via motion, and
375   it preserves the discretion of judges to require motions in
376   other situations. It provides that a motion and order are not
377   required before service of a non-grand-jury subpoena to
378   produce items “unless (c)(3) or (4), a local rule, or a court
379   order requires them.”

380           Rule 17(c)(2)(D). When a motion is required for a
381   non-grand-jury subpoena, new (c)(2)(D) states exactly what
382   a party must do in the motion to prove that the proposed
383   subpoena does indeed comply with (c)(2)(B)’s requirements.
384   Rule 17(c)(2)(D)(i) requires the party to demonstrate to the
385   court that the subpoena describes each designated item with
386   reasonable particularity. And (c)(2)(D)(ii) requires the party
387   to “state facts,” showing each item is “likely to be possessed




                                                              Rules Appendix E - Page 17
                             18           FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE




                  388        by the subpoena’s recipient,” “not reasonably available to
                  389        the party from another source,” and “likely to be admissible
                  390        as evidence in the designated proceeding.” Requiring a
                  391        factual basis is intended to prevent the use of Rule 17
                  392        subpoenas based upon unsubstantiated guesses or mere
                  393        speculation.

                  394                Rule 17(c)(2)(E) ensures that a court must, for good
                  395        cause, allow a party to file a motion for a subpoena to
                  396        produce items ex parte. Whether a party may seek a
                  397        subpoena ex parte has been another contested question under
                  398        the prior language of Rule 17(c). Although some courts have
                  399        read the Rule to preclude ex parte subpoena practice, most
                  400        allow it, some by local rule. Proceeding ex parte is important
                  401        when disclosure to another party of what the subpoena
                  402        requests, the identity of the recipient, or the explanation why
                  403        the subpoena complies with (c)(2)(B) could lead to damage
                  404        to or loss of the items that the party is attempting to obtain,
                  405        or divulge trial strategy, witness lists, or attorney work-
                  406        product. Without the ex parte option, defense counsel may
                  407        face the impossible choice of either not seeking a subpoena
                  408        and violating the ethical duty to prepare a plausible defense,
                  409        or seeking the subpoena and disclosing their trial strategy,
                  410        work-product, and other confidential information to the
                  411        government and co-defendants (who may have adverse
                  412        interests).

                  413                Rule 17(c)(2)(F) clarifies that unless required by a
                  414        local rule or court order, a party has no duty to inform the
                  415        other parties about a subpoena when no motion is required.

                  416                Rule 17(c)(3) retains the requirement in former
                  417        (c)(3) of a motion and court order for a subpoena seeking
                  418        personal and confidential information about a victim, now in
                  419        subparagraph (A), as well as the requirement of prior notice
                  420        to a victim absent exceptional circumstances, now in




Rules Appendix E - Page 18
      FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE                       19




421   subparagraph (B). Both requirements were added to the Rule
422   in 2008 to implement the Crime Victim’s Rights Act and are
423   unchanged, except for the addition of style revisions,
424   including adding the term “non-grand-jury” to (A).

425           The amendments also add a provision permitting ex
426   parte applications for good cause, but it is important to
427   distinguish that good cause requirement from the
428   “exceptional circumstances” concept in (c)(3). Exceptional
429   circumstances under (c)(3) would include a showing that
430   evidence might be lost or destroyed if the subpoena were
431   delayed or a situation where the defense would be unfairly
432   prejudiced by premature disclosure of a sensitive defense
433   strategy. It will be uncommon that a notice to a victim will
434   meaningfully implicate the concern about disclosing defense
435   strategy because, unlike subpoena applications under this
436   Rule, a notice merely informs the victim of the request, not
437   the reasons why the subpoena is sought. In contrast, the
438   showing of “good cause” to file a motion ex parte would
439   require an explanation of the reason.

440           The amendment also responds to a few decisions that
441   had interpreted the rule as applicable only to subpoenas for
442   personal or confidential information served on third parties
443   other than a victim. The amendment adds the words
444   “including a victim” to clarify that the requirement of a
445   motion and court order before a subpoena seeking personal
446   or confidential information about a victim may be served on
447   a third party applies when that third party is a victim.

448           Rule 17(c)(4). This new provision extends the
449   motion requirement to a subpoena requested by a self-
450   represented party. Two reasons underlie this decision. First,
451   self-represented parties are not bound by ethical rules that
452   deter an attorney’s misuse of the court’s compulsory
453   authority, raising the risk that the subpoena would not




                                                            Rules Appendix E - Page 19
                             20           FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE




                  454        comply with (c)(2)(B). Second, requiring judicial oversight
                  455        of this very small subset of subpoenas would not
                  456        significantly add to the courts’ burden, even in districts
                  457        where there is relatively little motion practice under Rule 17.

                  458                 Rule 17(c)(5) is also new. It clarifies when a
                  459        subpoena must order the recipient to produce designated
                  460        items to the court, and when it need not do so. Again, the text
                  461        in former (c)(1) stating that the “court may direct the witness
                  462        to produce the designated items in court before trial or before
                  463        they are to be offered into evidence” produced conflicting
                  464        decisions on this point. Some courts read the rule as always
                  465        requiring returns to the court, others that it required returns
                  466        to the court whenever a subpoena ordered production before
                  467        trial, and still others that it permitted returns directly to the
                  468        requesting party unless the court ordered items produced to
                  469        it. The Committee concluded that judges should have
                  470        discretion to determine where (and how) production should
                  471        take place. To the extent the prior text of the rule was leading
                  472        to unnecessary limits on the discretion of the court to allow
                  473        returns to the requesting party, it created needless burdens
                  474        for courts and required revision.

                  475               Accordingly, subsection (c)(5) sets three defaults,
                  476        each subject to departure by court order.

                  477                 First, (5)(A)(i) provides that a subpoena requested by
                  478        a self-represented party must require the recipient to produce
                  479        the designated items to the court. Judicial oversight at both
                  480        the issuance and production stages is added assurance that
                  481        parties without legal training or ethical responsibilities will
                  482        not deliberately or unintentionally access inappropriate or
                  483        non-compliant information that a judge would be able to
                  484        intercept if the recipient were required to provide the items
                  485        to the court.




Rules Appendix E - Page 20
      FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE                        21




486           The second default in (5) is for non-grand-jury
487   subpoenas that require the production of personal or
488   confidential information about a victim. Paragraph (5)(A)(ii)
489   provides that unless the court orders otherwise, such
490   subpoenas must require the recipient of such subpoenas to
491   produce the designated items to the court, not directly to
492   counsel. Production to the court provides an opportunity for
493   the court, before the information produced is disclosed to the
494   requesting party, to review the information produced in
495   camera, require redactions, restrict access, regulate
496   retention, add other protective orders, or take other actions
497   to protect the victim’s dignity and privacy.

498           The third default, in (5)(B), is that unless the court
499   orders otherwise, a subpoena that is requested by a
500   represented party and that does not require the production of
501   personal or confidential information about a victim may
502   require the recipient to produce the designated items to the
503   requesting party’s counsel. This default reflects present
504   practice in many districts.

505           The rule places no restrictions on the court’s
506   discretion to vary from these default rules. For example,
507   when a subpoena is likely to produce private or privileged
508   information, it is common practice for courts to order in
509   camera review before disclosure to anyone. And to provide
510   greater judicial oversight—for example, for subpoenas
511   requiring the production of personal or confidential
512   information—the rule permits a court, by local rule or court
513   order, to require the return of such information to chambers
514   before disclosure to the requesting party.

515          New Rule 17(c)(6) states, “This rule does not require
516   the disclosure of produced items to a party that did not
517   request the subpoena. Disclosure and discovery
518   requirements are not altered by this rule.” This provision




                                                             Rules Appendix E - Page 21
                             22           FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE




                  519        resolves another dispute about the meaning of the Rule’s
                  520        prior text, which some courts read as requiring that each
                  521        party have access to any item that a subpoena recipient
                  522        produces to another party. That position undermines the
                  523        careful calibration of discovery and disclosure in Rule 16
                  524        and other discovery rules. For example, even if every item
                  525        produced by a subpoena is admissible, it does not follow that
                  526        the requesting party will decide to use all of those items in
                  527        its “case-in-chief at trial.” And a defense subpoena may
                  528        produce inculpatory evidence the government did not know
                  529        about, as well as evidence the defense hopes to use at the
                  530        designated proceeding. The new text recognizes that the
                  531        regulation and timing regarding disclosure of information
                  532        and other items between parties, including information and
                  533        items the party may obtain by subpoena, are governed by the
                  534        Constitution, Rule 16, and other discovery rules. Rule 17
                  535        does not modify that carefully developed law.

                  536                Rule 17(c)(7) contains the text about motions to
                  537        quash previously in (c)(2). A second sentence has been added
                  538        clarifying that the showing described in new (c)(2)(D) must
                  539        be made by the party responding to a motion to quash a non-
                  540        grand-jury subpoena to produce items.

                  541                The second sentence of Rule 17(d) now includes the
                  542        words “or to the subpoena’s recipient” after “witness” to
                  543        clarify that it applies to both subpoenas for testimony and
                  544        subpoenas to produce items. The last sentence has been
                  545        restyled, adding “But” at the beginning and replacing
                  546        “when” with “if.”

                  547                 Rule 17(e)(1) contains an addition similar to that in
                  548        (d) to clarify its application to subpoenas to produce items as
                  549        well as subpoenas for testimony.

                  550               The heading of Rule 17(f) has been restyled.




Rules Appendix E - Page 22
      FEDERAL RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE                       23




551           Rule 17(g) includes three changes: (1) the heading
552   has been revised to better describe its content; (2) “or
553   subpoena recipient” has been added to clarify its application
554   to both subpoenas for testimony and subpoenas to produce
555   items; and (3) the reference to 28 U.S.C. § 636 has been
556   restyled.




                                                            Rules Appendix E - Page 23
             Excerpt from the May 8, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules


                           COMMITTEE ON RULES OF PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
                                                    OF THE
                                 JUDICIAL CONFERENCE OF THE UNITED STATES
                                           WASHINGTON, D.C. 20544

JAMES C. DEVER III                                                             CHAIRS OF ADVISORY COMMITTEES
     CHAIR
                                                                                        ALLISON H. EID
CAROLYN A. DUBAY                                                                       APPELLATE RULES
   SECRETARY
                                                                                     REBECCA B. CONNELLY
                                                                                      BANKRUPTCY RULES

                                                                                       SARAH S. VANCE
                                                                                         CIVIL RULES

                                                                                     MICHAEL W. MOSMAN
                                                                                       CRIMINAL RULES

                                                                                       JESSE M. FURMAN
                                                                                        EVIDENCE RULES



                                            MEMORANDUM *

    TO:               Hon. James C. Dever III, Chair
                      Committee on Rules of Practice and Procedure

    FROM:             Hon. Michael W. Mosman, Chair
                      Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules

    RE:               Report of the Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules

    DATE:       May 8, 2026
    _____________________________________________________________________________

    I.       INTRODUCTION

             The Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules met in Washington, D.C. on April 29, 2026.
    ***

          This report presents several action items. The Advisory Committee unanimously
    recommends final approval of amendments to Rule 17, which governs subpoenas. * * *

                                                 *****


    *
     A copy of the full committee report can be found in the June 2026 Standing Committee agenda book
    publicly available on www.uscourts.gov.



    Rules Appendix E - Page 24
           Excerpt from the May 8, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules


II.        ITEM FOR FINAL APPROVAL

           A.       Subpoena Authority (Rule 17) (22-CR-A; 24-CR-J; 25-CR-G)

       The Advisory Committee unanimously recommends final approval of the amendments to
Rule 17 with three changes to the text as published and several revisions to the committee note.

           1. The Major Elements of the Published Amendments

         The goal of the published amendments is to respond to the wide disparity in the
interpretation and application of Rule 17, and particularly to the problems encountered by counsel
in some districts where the courts interpret the rule so narrowly that subpoena practice is almost
nonexistent. The amendments make incremental changes and set default rules, while also allowing
districts and individual judges substantial discretion to adopt local rules or orders refining the
procedures. Although minor adjustments were made to other portions of the rule, these are the
amendments’ most significant changes to the existing rule.

           •    Proceedings Other Than Trial

        Some courts had interpreted the existing language in (c)(1), which refers only to “trial,” as
barring subpoenas for all proceedings other than trial. This interpretation leaves the defense with
no mechanism to obtain evidence from third parties for proceedings other than trial, and drastically
limits the government’s options to do so. 1 To fix this, new (c)(2)(A) expressly authorizes the use
of subpoenas at sentencing and suppression hearings (where subpoenas are already used regularly
in many districts) as well as detention and revocation hearings, where there is statutory or rule
authority for parties to present evidence and the need for third party evidence arises on occasion.

       The amendment also provides flexibility to the court to allow the use of subpoenas for other
evidentiary hearings in an individual case.

           •    Codifying a Somewhat Loosened Nixon Standard

        Rather than substituting an entirely different standard for non-grand-jury subpoenas
seeking the production of documents or other items, the amendment makes an incremental change,
codifying in (c)(2)(B) an interpretation of the Nixon 2 standard that is slightly looser than what
some courts have demanded. Some courts have required the requesting party to prove with
certainty that the information sought by the subpoena would be admitted, thus barring, for
example, subpoenas for impeachment evidence until after the other party had presented its
witnesses. The Advisory Committee was persuaded these decisions had applied the admissibility
requirement in Nixon’s interpretation of prior text too rigidly. In other districts, judges have found
the “admissibility” requirement of Nixon can be satisfied by a showing of likely admissibility, and
defense and government practitioners in such districts reported no problems. Retaining some

1
  The government may obtain evidence from third parties for non-trial proceedings with a search warrant, or, under
limited circumstances, with a grand jury subpoena.
2
    United States v. Nixon, 418 U.S. 683 (1974).




                                                                                         Rules Appendix E - Page 25
         Excerpt from the May 8, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules


relationship to admissibility narrowed the scope of what can be sought by tying that information
to the designated proceeding and further preventing “fishing expeditions.”

        The Advisory Committee adopted the “likely admissible” language to indicate that
somewhat more flexibility is intended. In doing so, it rejected an alternative formulation— “likely
to lead to” admissible evidence—that would have nudged the amendments even closer to the
standards supported by the City Bar Committee, the National Association of Criminal Defense
Lawyers (NACDL), and many of the defense practitioners who spoke with the Advisory
Committee. The note also observes that if a court is concerned that some categories of
subpoenas—such as those seeking particular types of information, or seeking information for a
particular type of proceeding—pose a special risk of noncompliance with these requirements, the
court has discretion to require that those subpoenas be authorized by court order upon motion
and/or to order that the recipient produce the items to the court instead of directly to the requesting
party’s counsel.

         •   When Motion and Order Required

         New (c)(2)(C) provides a clear rule explaining when a party must obtain the court’s
permission by motion before serving a subpoena and when the party may serve a subpoena without
motion. Courts continue to differ on when a motion is required based in part on the ambiguity of
the language in (c)(1), and the Nixon Court’s interpretation of this provision as requiring court
authorization for a subpoena seeking production in advance of trial. In many districts, motions
before issuance are not routinely required. Practitioners and judges expressed significant concerns
about the burdens that a motion requirement for all or most 17(c) subpoenas would create in their
districts, for both counsel and courts.

        The added text ensures court supervision when needed most, while providing flexibility to
courts to add or continue a motion requirement for particular types of subpoenas or cases. It retains
the motion requirement in (c)(3)—the existing provision regulating subpoenas seeking personal or
confidential information about a victim—and adds new (c)(4) requiring a motion before a self-
represented party may serve a subpoena to produce items. Otherwise, the new provision allows a
represented party to serve a subpoena without a motion, unless a motion is required by local rule
or court order. The committee note explains that protective orders and other requirements can be
adequate to control potential abuse of the subpoena process by the parties, but that individual courts
may choose to adopt or continue broader motion requirements by local rule or court order.

         •   Proceeding Ex Parte

        New (c)(2)(E) and (F) respond to concerns raised by some courts’ decisions that the
existing text of the rule mandates disclosure of every motion and subpoena to all parties. The
Advisory Committee concluded that both the defense and the government had advanced persuasive
reasons for proceeding ex parte under Rule 17(c), and that permitting ex parte motions and
production had been working well in many districts.

        New (E) provides that upon a showing of good cause a court must permit a party to file ex
parte a motion for a subpoena. The proposed amendment uses mandatory language to avoid any



Rules Appendix E - Page 26
        Excerpt from the May 8, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules


possibility that an individual judge, or a district by local rule, could prohibit ex parte motions. New
(c)(2)(F) also states that a party has no duty to inform the other parties about a subpoena when no
motion is required, absent an order to do so.

       •   Place of Production

        New (c)(5) clarifies the circumstances that require a subpoena recipient to produce the
designated items to the court rather than to the requesting party. This is yet another issue that has
divided courts interpreting the rule’s existing text in (c)(1). Some courts read the current rule as
requiring recipients of all subpoenas to produce the designated items to the court. Others regularly
permit returns directly to the party seeking the items. The revised text again adopts a default rule,
mandating returns to the court, unless the court orders otherwise, if the requesting party is self-
represented. For other subpoenas, the new text makes returns to a party’s counsel discretionary,
allowing courts to determine when they wish to receive and review subpoenaed materials before
receipt by counsel.

       •   Preserving Disclosure Policies in Rule 16

        New (c)(6) resolves another dispute about the meaning of the rule’s existing text, which
some courts read as requiring that each party have access to any items that a subpoena recipient
produces to another party, regardless of whether they would be subject to discovery under Rule 16.
By providing that disclosure to an opposing party is required only if the item is discoverable under
the rules, the amendment avoids undermining the careful calibration of discovery and disclosure
in Rule 16 and other discovery rules.

       •   Clarifying Which Provisions Apply to Different Proceedings

       To improve clarity and avoid confusion, the amendments clearly indicate what types of
subpoenas are governed by each provision.

           o Subdivision (a) applies to all subpoenas: those to testify and those to produce
             material, and to grand jury and non-grand-jury subpoenas.
           o Subdivision (b) applies only to subpoenas to testify.
           o Subdivision (c) applies only to subpoenas to produce designated items. Within (c),
             paragraphs (2) through (6) apply only to non-grand-jury subpoenas.
           o Subdivisions (d) and (e) regarding service apply to both subpoenas for testimony
             and subpoenas to produce designated items.

       In sum, the published amendments, endorsed unanimously by all of the judicial,
prosecution, and defense members of the Advisory Committee and unanimously approved for
publication by the Standing Committee, reflect a series of compromises on major issues:

       • Scope of proceedings: NACDL argued subpoenas should be available for any evidentiary
       hearing, while victims’ advocates wanted subpoenas to be limited to trials. The published
       rule took a middle position, listing certain hearings in (c)(2)(A) and requiring judicial
       permission for others.



                                                                                Rules Appendix E - Page 27
         Excerpt from the May 8, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules


         • Evidentiary standard: Defense advocates called for the “relevant and material” standard,
         but victims’ advocates sought retention of the Nixon standard or stronger protections. The
         published standard of “likely to be admissible” was chosen as middle ground.

         • Motion and order. An early subcommittee draft required a motion and order for any
         subpoena seeking personal or confidential information about anyone, but that requirement
         was strongly opposed by judges and practitioners alike during the November 2024
         Advisory Committee meeting. As a compromise, the published amendment added to the
         motion and order requirement for victim information a motion requirement for all
         subpoenas sought by self-represented defendants and restrictions for other subpoenas (e.g.,
         the requirement of advance judicial authorization to proceed ex parte).

         • Ex parte procedures: Defense advocates strongly supported the availability of ex parte
         applications to protect trial strategy, work product, and client confidences, while victims'
         advocates argued ex parte proceedings violate the Crime Victims’ Rights Act (CVRA)
         right to consult with the prosecution and would enable abuse. The published amendment’s
         middle position permitted ex parte applications but allowed a local rule or court order to
         require disclosure that one party is seeking or has served the subpoena.

         • Direct production to counsel: Defense advocates argued judges should not have the option
         of ordering returns to the court, while victims’ advocates strongly opposed direct returns
         to defense counsel, citing the potential harm to victims. The published amendment
         provided a default of production to the court for self-represented defendants, and allowed
         direct production to counsel unless otherwise ordered by the court or by local rule.

         2. The Public Comments

        The public comments included renewed advocacy for stronger positions on several of these
contested issues. The thirteen comments 3 on Rule 17 reveal a division between supporters of
clarifying and expanding Rule 17 subpoenas, and victims’ rights advocates who strongly oppose
expansion. Eight commenters—including individuals, defense organizations, the Federal
Magistrate Judges Association, and the Judicial Conference Committee on Criminal Law—
supported the amendments with varying degrees of enthusiasm and a variety of suggested
modifications. Several urge modifications to the proposed amendments that would provide greater
access to information in the hands of third parties. Three commenters—Professor Cassell,
Professor Garvin, and Volare’s representative Ms. Eliason—strongly opposed the changes, based
on victims’ rights concerns. They urged rejection of the published modifications that would further
restrict access to third-party information. Finally, two comments took no position on the
amendment as a whole but raised particular questions or issues. A brief summary of each comment
appears at the end of this memorandum.



3
   This count includes Professor Garvin’s testimony, but not Comment USC-RULES-CR-2025-0003-001 by
International Attestations, LLC, which mentions Rule 17 only in a footnote listing all of the published rules and merely
states “they are worthy of comment as well.” It took no position on Rule 17 and made no other comments or
suggestions concerning it.




Rules Appendix E - Page 28
       Excerpt from the May 8, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules


       3. The Advisory Committee’s Recommendations

        The Advisory Committee concluded that the compromises reflected in the published
amendments largely struck the right balance between the competing positions and considerations.
It declined to revise the fundamental elements of the published amendment, endorsing these
features of the published rule:

   •   the expansion of the scope of proceedings for which subpoenas may be sought including
       hearings on detention, suppression, sentencing, and revocation and, with the court’s
       permission, other evidentiary hearings,

   •   the relaxation of the Nixon standard, including the evidentiary standard of “likely to be
       admissible,” and

   •   the explicit authorization of ex parte applications upon a showing of good cause.

The Advisory Committee also reaffirmed its support for allowing direct production of material
produced to counsel. However, as noted below, it recommends adding to the text a presumption
of production to the court when a subpoena seeks personal or confidential information about a
victim.

       The discussion below begins with the Advisory Committee’s recommended changes to the
published text, then its recommended changes to the note, and ends with issues raised by the
commenters that the Advisory Committee concluded raised no changes.

       a. Recommended changes in the text

       The Advisory Committee recommends the following revisions to the published text, none
of which in its view require republication.

   •   17(a) – technical correction making explicit that a subpoena can require testimony,
       production, or both testimony and production

   •   17(c)(3)(A) – clarifying that a motion and order for a subpoena seeking personal or
       confidential information about a victim from a third party is required when the third party
       receiving the subpoena is a victim

   •   17(c)(5) – addition of presumptive requirement of return to the court for subpoenas
       requiring the production of personal and confidential information about a victim

       (i)    17(a) (subpoena contents)

        Rule 17(a) carries forward the current requirements for the contents of subpoenas,
including the proceeding’s title and court’s seal, etc. The text as published had been revised to
clarify that it applies to both subpoenas for producing items as well as those for testimony.
However, as NACDL noted in its submitted comments, the published language did not appear to
include subpoenas to testify and produce items at the same hearing. USC-RULES-CR-2025-0003-



                                                                             Rules Appendix E - Page 29
         Excerpt from the May 8, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules


0015 at 2. As published, (a) provides that a subpoena must “require the recipient to attend and
testify or produce designated items at a specified time and place.”

        The Advisory Committee agreed that the text of (a) should be clarified to recognize that
subpoenas may require testimony, production, or both. Accordingly, it recommends the following
(style-approved) revision of the first sentence of (a):

     A subpoena must state the court’s name and the proceeding’s title, include the court’s
     seal, and require that the recipient to attend and testify or produce designated items—
     at a specified time and place—attend and testify, produce designated items, or do both.

No change in the committee note is needed for this correction of the text, since the new language
and the published committee note already reflect the current understanding of Rule 17(a), which
the Advisory Committee intended to carry forward. For the same reason, republication is not
required.

         (ii)     17(c)(3)(A) (victim information subpoenas)

       Rule 17(c)(3)(A) allows “a non-grand jury subpoena requiring the production of personal
or confidential information about a victim to be served on a third party only by court order upon
motion.”

        Professor Cassell argued that there was an error in the 2008 revision of Rule 17(c)(3),
limiting the requirement of a motion and order to subpoenas to be served on a third party, and not
when service is to be made directly on the victim. Cassell Revised Statement, USC-RULES-CR-
2025-0003-0016, at 11-12 (hereinafter Cassell Revised Statement). He argued that the proposed
revisions would allow subpoenas to victims for a wide variety of personal or confidential
information before trial and that although one might argue that the victim is a “third party” to the
case, the rule seems to distinguish between the victim and the third party from whom victim
information is being sought. Id. The Advisory Committee’s research identified two cases which
supported Professor Cassell’s concern, concluding that victims are not “third parties” under current
Rule 17(c)(3).

        Given the confusion on this point, the Advisory Committee approved this clarification in
the text:

         (A)      Motion and Order Required. After a complaint, indictment, or information is filed,
                  a non-grand-jury subpoena requiring the production of personal or confidential
                  information about a victim may be served on a third party, including a victim, only
                  by court order upon motion.

The proposed note explaining this change states (lines 437-444):

         The amendment also responds to a few decisions that had interpreted the rule as
         applicable only to subpoenas for personal or confidential information served on
         third parties other than a victim. The amendment adds the words “including a



Rules Appendix E - Page 30
       Excerpt from the May 8, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules


       victim” to clarify that the requirement of a motion and court order before a
       subpoena seeking personal or confidential information about a victim may be
       served on a third party applies when that third party is a victim.

         There was no opposition to clarifying in the text that the term “third-party” includes
victims. Victims are not parties in criminal cases. In criminal cases they are generally considered
“third-parties” like nonparty media representatives, nonparty subpoena recipients, nonparty asset
owners, etc. If the disclosure of a victim’s personal and confidential information is so sensitive
that it warrants judicial prescreening of a subpoena to allow the judge to reject or narrow the scope
of the request and put in place an appropriate protective order to safeguard the information, then
judges should exercise the same oversight for any such subpoena, whether the recipient is a third
party who is not a victim, a victim other than the victim whose information is sought, or the victim
whose information is sought.

        Because the Advisory Committee viewed the revision as making explicit the intention of
the 2008 amendments and resolving an ambiguity that came to light during the public comment
period, it did not deem the change to be “substantial,” and it concluded additional public input was
not needed. Accordingly, it concluded the revision does not require republication.

       (iii)   17(c)(5) (place of production)

        As published, Rule 17(c)(5) stated that “A non-grand-jury subpoena requested by a
represented party may require the recipient to produce the designated items to that party’s
counsel.” For subpoenas sought by a self-represented party, however, the amendment provided
that the subpoena must require production to the court unless the court orders otherwise. The
published committee note explained:

                … [(c)(5)] clarifies when a subpoena must order the recipient to produce
       designated items to the court, and when it need not do so. Again, the text in former
       (c)(1) stating that the “court may direct the witness to produce the designated items
       in court before trial or before they are to be offered into evidence” produced
       conflicting decisions on this point. Some courts read the rule as always requiring
       returns to the court, others that it required returns to the court whenever a subpoena
       ordered production before trial, and still others that it permitted returns directly to
       the requesting party unless the court ordered items produced to it. The Committee
       concluded that judges should have discretion to determine where (and how)
       production should take place. To the extent the prior text of the rule was leading to
       unnecessary limits on the discretion of the court to allow returns to the requesting
       party, it created needless burdens for courts and required revision.

               Accordingly, subsection (c)(5) sets two defaults, both subject to departure
       by court order. First, it provides that a subpoena requested by a self-represented
       party must require the recipient to produce the designated items to the court.
       Judicial oversight at both the issuance and production stages is added assurance that
       parties without legal training or ethical responsibilities will not deliberately or
       unintentionally access inappropriate or non-compliant information that a judge



                                                                               Rules Appendix E - Page 31
         Excerpt from the May 8, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules


         would be able to intercept if the recipient were required to provide the items to the
         court. The second default in (5) is for all other non-grand-jury subpoenas, namely
         those sought by represented parties. It provides the subpoena may require the
         recipient to produce the designated items to that party’s counsel, reflecting present
         practice in many districts. The rule places no restrictions on the court’s discretion
         to vary from these default rules. For example, when a subpoena is likely to produce
         private or privileged information, it is common practice for courts to order in
         camera review before disclosure to anyone.

        This part of the published amendment generated widely divergent comments. Defense
commenters expressed strong support for this provision for the reasons stated in the published
committee note, but NACDL claimed that the statement in the committee note at lines 333-337
erroneously limited what it read as a more sweeping change by the text. USC-RULES-CR-2005-
0003-0015 at 4 n. 3. The statement in the published Note read: “the court has discretion ... to order
that the recipient produce the items to the court instead of directly to the requesting party’s counsel
(see (c)(5)).” NACDL argued that “under proposed (c)(5) such judicial discretion applies only to
subpoenas issued by pro se defendants.” Id. (emphasis added.) The court’s discretion, in NACDL’s
reading of the text, was limited to only subpoenas sought by self-represented defendants, “where
greater judicial control is required to compensate for the lack of professional responsibility and
judgment that counsel representation ensures.” Id. Accordingly, NACDL argued, the court has no
discretion to restrict the location of production when subpoenas are sought by represented parties.

        In contrast, victim advocates expressed strong opposition to any direct production to
defense counsel, contending that (c)(5) would strip away another critical safeguard for victims.
Professor Cassell stated that direct production would “cut[] the district court out of its statutorily
required role of protecting crime victims” as required by 18 U.S.C. § 3771(b)(1). Cassell Revised
Statement at 15. Moreover, since the proposed rule permits ex parte motions, prosecutors may also
be prevented from discharging their statutory duties to use their “best efforts” to see crime victims
are notified of and accorded their rights under the CVRA. Id. at 15-16. Ms. Eliason expressed
alarm that direct production would “make it easier for [victims’] intimate information to be directly
accessed by defendants, exacerbating victims’ retraumatization, revictimization, and safety risks.”
Eliason Revised Statement, USC-RULES-CR-2025-0003-0017, at 8 (hereinafter Eliason Revised
Statement). She described how the current process of return to the court protects victims:

         … victims typically have at least the chance to seek protective orders from the court with
         respect to documents produced to defendants. These protective orders often redact portions
         of the documents to preserve victims’ privacy, or tailor the manner in which defendants
         access the personal information altogether. A staff attorney at Volare who regularly assists
         victims with redactions describes it as a “time-consuming process.” Each subpoena request
         can entail a series of proposed redactions back and forth between the victim, the defendant,
         and the court, often requiring specific data sharing platforms like Box that a victim may be
         unfamiliar with using. …

         But the amendments to Rule 17 will enable defendants and defense counsel’s access to
         significantly more sensitive and private information from victims directly—such as
         reproductive health, mental health, and citizenship records—because Rule 17 will no



Rules Appendix E - Page 32
         Excerpt from the May 8, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules


         longer contemplate the court’s involvement as both the court’s responsibility under the
         Crime Victims’ Rights Act (CVRA) and as a safeguard in ensuring that victims are
         afforded their rights. Because documents will be delivered directly to defense counsel, the
         court, victims, and their counsel will not have the opportunity to redact, contest, or remove
         non-responsive portions of records.

Id. (footnotes omitted). Ms. Eliason emphasized that “[w]ithout review of records turned over to
defense, the court is no longer able to strike nonresponsive requests, implement redactions, and
create guardrails around defendants’ access to sensitive information before defense has access to
the information. The amended rule alienates judges from their rightful duty to ensure victims are
afforded their rights.” Id. at 9. Moreover, she expressed concern that production without judicial
oversight can create the risk of serious harm to victims. For example, without redaction,
subpoenaed material might provide information about the times and locations of medical or
therapy sessions, creating an opportunity for further crimes against victims. Id. at 8-9.

         Noting that NACDL’s submission identified an ambiguity in the published rule and
committee note, 4 the Advisory Committee favored clarifying the rule to remove this ambiguity. It
also concluded that the text should clearly state a default requiring production of personal and
confidential information about a victim to the court — rather than directly to counsel — unless the
court orders otherwise. The Advisory Committee understood that production to the court in this
situation was common practice.

       The Advisory Committee approved the following revised text for (c)(5). For clarity, the
clean version appears below:

           (5) Non-Grand-Jury Subpoena--Place to Produce the Designated Items. Unless the
         court orders otherwise, a non-grand-jury subpoena:
                 (A) must require the recipient to produce the designated items to the court if the
                 subpoena:
                         (i) is requested by a self-represented party; or
                         (ii) requires the production of personal or confidential information about a
                         victim; and
                 (B) may require the recipient to produce the designated items to that the requesting
                 party’s counsel if the subpoena:
                         (i) is requested by a represented party; and



4
  NACDL’s interpretation of the rule was not unreasonable—though it is not consistent with the committee note nor,
we believe, with the intent of the Advisory Committee. In contrast to the first sentence of (c)(5), which references the
court’s ability to vary the default rule regarding self-represented defendants, the remainder of (c)(5) states only that
“[a] non-grand-jury subpoena requested by a represented party may require the recipient to produce the designated
items to that party’s counsel.” (Emphasis added). This language might be read as granting permission to the party
seeking the subpoena to determine whether to require production directly to counsel. If (c)(5) is read together with
(c)(2)(C), which allows subpoenas to be filed without a motion or order unless (c)(3) or (4) or a local order requires
them, that interpretation becomes less reasonable, because those provisions recognize the court’s discretion to require
production to be made to the court to permit in camera review, either by an order in an individual case, or by local
rule.




                                                                                             Rules Appendix E - Page 33
         Excerpt from the May 8, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules


                             (ii) does not require the production of personal or confidential information
                             about a victim.

The changes are shown on lines 111-132 of the redline version. The revision to the committee note
approved to accompany this change explains (at lines 455-506):

                  Rule 17(c)(5) is also new. It clarifies when a subpoena must order the recipient to
         produce designated items to the court, and when it need not do so. Again, the text in former
         (c)(1) stating that the “court may direct the witness to produce the designated items in court
         before trial or before they are to be offered into evidence” produced conflicting decisions
         on this point. Some courts read the rule as always requiring returns to the court, others that
         it required returns to the court whenever a subpoena ordered production before trial, and
         still others that it permitted returns directly to the requesting party unless the court ordered
         items produced to it. The Committee concluded that judges should have discretion to
         determine where (and how) production should take place. To the extent the prior text of
         the rule was leading to unnecessary limits on the discretion of the court to allow returns to
         the requesting party, it created needless burdens for courts and required revision.

                Accordingly, subsection (c)(5) sets two three defaults, both each subject to
         departure by court order.

                 First, it(5)(A)(i) provides that a subpoena requested by a self-represented party
         must require the recipient to produce the designated items to the court. Judicial oversight
         at both the issuance and production stages is added assurance that parties without legal
         training or ethical responsibilities will not deliberately or unintentionally access
         inappropriate or non-compliant information that a judge would be able to intercept if the
         recipient were required to provide the items to the court.

                  The second default in (5) is for all other non-grand-jury subpoenas that require the
         production of personal or confidential information about a victim namely those sought by
         represented parties. Paragraph (5)(A)(ii) provides that unless the court orders otherwise,
         such subpoenas must require the recipient of such subpoenas to produce the designated
         items to the court, not directly to counsel. Production to the court provides an opportunity
         for the court, before the information produced is disclosed to the requesting party, to review
         the information produced in camera, require redactions, restrict access, regulate retention,
         add other protective orders, or take other actions to protect the victim’s dignity and privacy.

                 The third default, in (5)(B), is that unless the court orders otherwise, It provides the
         a subpoena that is requested by a represented party and that does not require the production
         of personal or confidential information about a victim may require the recipient to produce
         the designated items to that the requesting party’s counsel, reflecting. This default reflects
         present practice in many districts.

                 The rule places no restrictions on the court’s discretion to vary from these default
         rules. For example, when a subpoena is likely to produce private or privileged information,
         it is common practice for courts to order in camera review before disclosure to anyone.



Rules Appendix E - Page 34
       Excerpt from the May 8, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules



        The Advisory Committee concluded that the proposed revision would not require
republication. It responds to public comments contending that the proposed amendment would
have the unintended effect of bypassing a common procedure that has provided substantial
protection to victims. The testimony and written comments provided an ample basis for the
Advisory Committee to make its decision, and the Advisory Committee saw no need for further
public comments. Moreover, the proposed revision received unanimous support from all members
of the Advisory Committee, who did not see it as controversial.

       b. Recommended changes in the notes

        In addition to the note revisions discussed above, the Advisory Committee recommends
revisions to the published committee notes to 17(c)(5), 17(c)(3)(B) and 17(c)(2)(B)(ii).

       (i)     17(c)(5)

       An addition to the note on 17(c)(5) is discussed in the next section, pages 19-22, in
connection with comments seeking a change in the text.

       (ii)    17(c)(3)(B)

        Rule 17(c)(3)(B) requires notice to the victim before an order is entered allowing a
subpoena for the victim’s personal or confidential information. Current Rule 17(c)(3) requires a
court order to subpoena this personal or confidential information, and states that absent
“exceptional circumstances” the court must require giving notice to the victim before entering the
order. The published amendment did not disturb this language, which was part of the original
(c)(3) provision added to Rule 17 in 2008.

       Both Ms. Eliason and Professor Cassell emphasized the link between ex parte motions and
what they saw as a critical gap in the requirement that victims receive notice when a party seeks a
subpoena requiring the production of personal or confidential information about a victim. Cassell
Revised Statement at 16-25; Eliason Revised Statement at 11-14. Their principal concern was that
the courts will find “exceptional circumstances” and grant ex parte orders for personal or
confidential information without giving the victims notice to permit them to move to quash the
subpoena or otherwise object. Indeed, in that situation, the victim might be unaware that their
confidential information had been provided by a third party.

     Professor Cassell and Ms. Eliason focused on the underlined language in the 2008
Committee Note to Rule 17(c):

       The amendment provides a mechanism for notifying the victim, and makes it clear that a
       victim may move to quash or modify the subpoena under Rule 17(c)(2)—or object by other
       means such as a letter—on the grounds that it is unreasonable or oppressive. The rule
       recognizes, however, that there may be exceptional circumstances in which this procedure
       may not be appropriate. Such exceptional circumstances would include, evidence that
       might be lost or destroyed if the subpoena were delayed or a situation where the defense




                                                                             Rules Appendix E - Page 35
         Excerpt from the May 8, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules


         would be unfairly prejudiced by premature disclosure of a sensitive defense strategy. The
         Committee leaves to the judgment of the court a determination as to whether the judge will
         permit the question whether such exceptional circumstances exist to be decided ex parte
         and authorize service of the third-party subpoena without notice to anyone.

        In their view, it will nearly always be possible for the defense seeking a subpoena for victim
information to argue that defense strategy would be prematurely disclosed. Moreover, they urged,
that problem is compounded by the last sentence, which permits the court to make that judgment
ex parte “without notice to anyone.” Cassell Revised Statement at 23-25; Eliason Revised
Statement at 11-12. This, they argued, violates the courts’ duty under the CVRA to ensure that
victims are treated with fairness and with respect for their dignity and privacy. See 18 U.S.C. §
3771(a)(8). And notice to the victim of the fact a subpoena is being sought is critical, because it is
the necessary predicate to the victim’s ability to contest the subpoena or seek its modification.

        Responding to this concern, the Advisory Committee agreed to add language to the
published committee note accompanying the statutory duty of notice in (c)(3). Specifically, the
addition draws attention to the distinction between disclosing a detailed explanation of reasons for
requesting an ex parte subpoena, which in some cases may prematurely disclose trial strategy, and
notifying the victim that a party is seeking his or her information from a particular subpoena
recipient, which would not ordinarily reveal confidential strategy. Becoming aware that a
subpoena is being sought is not the same as being handed a roadmap of how a party will use the
material. The suggested addition to the published note is shown in red, below:

                Rule 17(c)(3) retains the requirement in former (c)(3) of a motion and court order
         for a subpoena seeking personal and confidential information about a victim, now in
         subparagraph (A), as well as the requirement of prior notice to a victim absent exceptional
         circumstances, now in subparagraph (B). Both requirements were added to the Rule in
         2008 to implement the Crime Victim’s Rights Act and are unchanged, except for the
         addition of style revisions, including adding the term “non-grand-jury” to (A).

                 The amendments also add a provision permitting ex parte applications for good
         cause, but it is important to distinguish that good cause requirement from the “exceptional
         circumstances” concept in (c)(3). Exceptional circumstances under (c)(3) would include
         that evidence might be lost or destroyed if the subpoena were delayed or a situation where
         the defense would be unfairly prejudiced by premature disclosure of a sensitive defense
         strategy. 5 It will be uncommon that a notice to a victim will meaningfully implicate the
         concern about disclosing defense strategy because, unlike subpoena applications under this
         Rule, a notice merely informs the victim of the request, not the reasons why the subpoena



5
  To make the note read more smoothly than the version approved by the Advisory Committee, Judge Mosman
suggests the Standing Committee add the words “a showing” to the note. If approved by the Standing Committee, the
sentence would read:

         Exceptional circumstances under (c)(3) would include a showing that evidence might be lost or destroyed if
         the subpoena were delayed or a situation where the defense would be unfairly prejudiced by premature
         disclosure of a sensitive defense strategy.



Rules Appendix E - Page 36
       Excerpt from the May 8, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules


       is sought. In contrast, the showing of “good cause” to file a motion ex parte would require
       an explanation of the reason.

        In the Advisory Committee’s view, this addition to the note would not require
republication. The first step in the republication analysis is whether the change is substantial. The
limited role of committee notes supports the conclusion that republication is not required.
Committee notes are not permitted to change, restrict, or expand the rule stated in the text. Given
the limited role played by committee notes, inclusion of the new language in the committee note—
not the text of the rule—provides support for the view that the change is not substantial.

        Moreover, the proposed addition to the note is consistent with the language in the 2008
committee note for (c)(3). It carries forward language explaining that both loss of evidence and
unfair prejudice by premature disclosure of a sensitive defense strategy may constitute exceptional
circumstances, while providing an explanation why disclosure to the victim that a subpoena is
being sought will seldom result in the latter.

       (iii) 17(c)(2)(B)(iii)

       Finally, the Advisory Committee recommends a revision in the note accompanying
17(c)(2)(B)(ii) for clarity. Subparagraph (c)(2)(B) articulates the modified version of the test
announced by the Supreme Court in Nixon. At lines 326-28 the committee note explains that the
published rule included no separate reference to relevance “because it is not likely that information
would be admissible unless it was relevant.” The Advisory Committee concluded that this sentence
was wordy and confusing, and it recommends that it be revised to read “There is no separate
reference to “relevance” in (c)(2)(B) because information would not be admissible unless it were
relevant.”

         The revised language recognizes that relevance is a foundational requirement for
admissibility. This clarification is especially helpful in light of the concerns expressed by some
commentators that the “likely to be admissible” standard was a poor fit for proceedings like
sentencing and suppression hearings, where the Federal Rules of Evidence do not apply. As
members noted at the meeting, even in proceedings where the FRE are not applicable, courts still
determine admissibility applying the basic standards of relevance, as well as authenticity, and
reliability. Privileges apply as well under FRE 1101(c).

       c. Recommendations for no changes

       (i)     Victim concerns about expanding the scope of the proceedings

       Victim advocates expressed strong opposition to authorizing the availability of subpoenas
to proceedings other than trial, arguing that this would have a very serious detrimental effect on
victims.

       Professor Paul Cassell argued that because 95% of cases are currently resolved by pleas,
expanding subpoenas to non-trial settings would expand “the possible situations where victims
could be subpoenaed by something like 20-fold—i.e., around 2000%.” Cassell Revised Statement



                                                                              Rules Appendix E - Page 37
         Excerpt from the May 8, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules


at 7. He argued, for example, that allowing defense subpoenas for detention hearings in a violent
crime case would permit routine subpoenas for all of the victim’s medical and psychological
records in an effort to undercut the government’s arguments regarding the level of danger the
defendant presents. Id. at 7. He questioned the Advisory Committee’s assumption that detention
hearings happen so swiftly such subpoenas will be rare. Id. He noted that the Advisory
Committee’s “consensus” on this point reflected only the views of judges, prosecutors, and defense
counsel—but not victim advocates. Indeed, Cassell suggests that defense attorneys in a violent
crime case would ordinarily move to subpoena the victim’s medical and treatment records. He
expressed doubt that the other requirements (particularity, reason to believe that the recipient
possesses the material sought, and not reasonably available from another source) would be difficult
to overcome or provide much of a safeguard. Id. at 8-9. Similarly, he argued that at sentencing
hearings defense counsel could use subpoenas as the functional equivalent of cross-examining
victims by examining their confidential records. He emphasized that victims are not currently
subject to cross-examination, so this would be a significant change, greatly increasing the victim’s
trauma. Id. at 9.

         In her testimony, Professor Meg Garvin also expressed concern that “all parts of Rule 17
affect victims,” and that the combined effect of the amendments would increase the number of
subpoenas for victim information, and that the expansion to proceedings other than trial would
permit what she called “persistent subpoenas” for this information. Jan. 22, 2026 Tr. of Hr’gs on
Prop. Amends. to Rule 17, at 27-28. She stressed that “the lower practical barriers to repeated
demands for information are going to expose victims” to trauma, as well as the difficulty of
navigating the unfamiliar criminal justice system at an earlier time in the proceedings “where
relevance is more up in the air and the rules of evidence are not necessarily in play at all or are in
play in a restricted fashion.” Id. at 28-29. She expressed special concern about fishing expeditions,
especially in sexual assault cases. Id. at 29. Similarly, Ms. Eliason expressed concern that the
revised standard of admissibility is ill suited to non-trial proceedings in which the Rules of
Evidence are not applicable or the applicability of evidentiary rules is “illusory.” Eliason Revised
Statement at 7. She urged that the “likely to be admissible standard offers “almost no shelter at
all” for victims and expressed concern that judges might become more likely to grant subpoenas
for efficiency’s sake because of the workload generated by the increased number of subpoenas. Id.

       The Advisory Committee declined to revise Rule 17(c)(2)(A) to restrict the scope of
application to trial alone or to edit the list of proceedings where subpoenas are presumptively
available. Although the concerns raised by the victim advocates are substantial, subpoenas are
already available for some (or all) of these pretrial proceedings as well as others in a significant
number of districts, and there has been no indication that the serious consequences Professor
Cassell and other victim advocates fear are occurring now in those districts.

        In making this decision, the Advisory Committee reconfirmed its understanding that
subpoenas are now in use for these purposes in many districts. It reviewed research that identified
many districts in which courts have recognized Rule 17 subpoenas proceedings for the proceedings
identified Rule 17(c)(2)(A), as well as two circuits recognizing that subpoenas may be permitted




Rules Appendix E - Page 38
           Excerpt from the May 8, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules


for sentencing. 6 It noted that a leading treatise states that Rule 17 subpoenas are not limited to
trials and may be issued for purposes including a deposition or a determination of an issue of fact
raised by a pretrial motion. 7 A member confirmed that in her district, they are able to subpoena
documents and materials for court proceedings other than trial, including detention hearings,
suppression hearings, and violation hearings.

        Making subpoenas available for these proceedings facilitates the rights provided in other
rules. The rules for the pretrial proceedings identified in the proposed amendment already give the
defendant a right to present evidence, or assume that the judge will allow the defendant to do so.
Rule 17 provides the only avenue for obtaining evidence from third parties for use in those
proceedings. Rule 46 requires compliance with the Bail Reform Act, 18 U.S.C. § 3142(f), which
provides that at the detention hearing, a person “has the right . . . to present witnesses, to cross-
examine witnesses who appear at the hearing, and to present information by proffer or otherwise.”
A defendant may need to testify or introduce evidence at a suppression hearing. The government
too may occasionally turn to Rule 17 to obtain evidence from third parties for a pretrial hearing,
for example, to rebut a defendant’s factual allegation. As for post-trial hearings, Rule 32 does not
grant any right to introduce evidence at the sentencing hearing, but Rule 32(i)(2) states that “[T]he
court may permit the parties to introduce evidence on the objections,” and Rule 32(i)(4)(ii) states
the court must “permit the defendant to speak or present any information to mitigate the sentence.”
At revocation hearings, however, Rule 32.1(b)(2)(C) expressly includes an entitlement of the
person to “present evidence[] and question any adverse witness[.]”

         The victim advocates did not claim that the harms they described are occurring in the
districts where such subpoenas are already permitted. When asked specifically at the January 22
hearing about problems in districts in which subpoenas are already permitted in proceedings other
than trial, Professor Garvin noted she always sought to limit Rule 17 subpoenas to trials (though
she was not always successful), and she acknowledged that when subpoenas were authorized for
other hearings, she had been able to litigate issues such as relevance and particularity. Jan. 22,
2026 Tr. of Hr’gs on Prop. Amends. to Rule 17, at 33-35. Professor Cassell and Ms. Eliason did
not directly address that issue. Similarly, at the November 2024 Committee meeting in New York,
the speakers who opposed the expansion of Rule 17 did not present information or argue that the
problems they anticipated were actually occurring in districts with expanded subpoena practice. 8

      The published rule also includes multiple options for a court to respond to any issues it
may encounter with subpoenas at non-trial proceedings. It expressly states that a court is free to

6
 United States v. Winner, 641 F.2d 825, 833 (10th Cir. 1981); United States v. Krane, 625 F.3d 568, 574 (9th Cir.
2010).
7
    2 WRIGHT, FEDERAL PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE: CRIMINAL 2d § 272 (4th ed.) states (footnotes omitted):
          Rule 17 is not limited to subpoenas for the trial. A subpoena may be issued for a preliminary examination, a
          grand jury investigation, a deposition, for determination of an issue of fact raised by a pre-trial motion, or for
          post-trial motions.
8
  Deputy Assistant Attorney General Lisa Miller did provide examples of cases in which information disclosed to the
defendant by the government during discovery under Rule 16 had been used by the defendant to harm and intimidate
third parties, Minutes of Criminal Rules Advisory Committee, November 6-7, 2024, at 32, but those examples did not
involve Rule 17 subpoenas.




                                                                                                 Rules Appendix E - Page 39
         Excerpt from the May 8, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules


regulate subpoenas, for example, by requiring a motion and order of the court before service, see
Rule17(c)(2)(C), and/or by requiring that items required to be produced by a subpoena, a category
of subpoenas, or all subpoenas be returned to the court and not directly to the requesting party, see
Rule 17(c)(5). In addition, judges may use protective orders as they wish. In other words, a court
can tailor the scope of its oversight to any concerns that may arise from subpoena practice in its
individual district. On the use of subpoenas for non-trial proceedings, as well as several other
issues, the proposed rule recognizes the need to provide district judges with flexibility and trusts
them to exercise it wisely.

         Although the victim advocates sought to narrow the scope of the rule to trials, NACDL’s
comment requested that the rule should be broadened to presumptively permit a subpoena for any
evidentiary hearing. USC-RULES-CR-2025-0003-0015, at 3-4. The Subcommittee did not find
this persuasive. The rule provides the necessary discretion to allow subpoenas for other evidentiary
hearings when warranted. The amendment assumes that not only will judges exercise their
discretion to provide more oversight should parties misuse subpoenas for proceedings other than
trial if needed, it trusts judges to be gatekeepers for the proper use of subpoenas at evidentiary
hearings other than those enumerated.

         (ii)     The revised Nixon standard

      Rule 17(c)(2)(B) governs the standard for the contents of subpoenas and includes the
Advisory Committee’s revision of the strict Nixon standard:

         (B)      Required Content and Limitations. The subpoena must describe each designated
                  item with reasonable particularity and seek only items that:
                  (i)    are likely to be possessed by the subpoena’s recipient;
                  (ii)   are not reasonably available to the party from another source; and
                  (iii) are, or contain information that is, likely to be admissible as evidence in the
                         designated proceeding.

        Multiple comments urged the Advisory Committee to revise this standard. Defense
commentators renewed their support for the more generous “relevant and material” standard, and
the victim advocates urged a return to the Nixon standard.

      The comments from the New York City Bar’s White Collar Committee, the New York
County Lawyers Association’s Federal Courts Committee, NACDL, and individual commenter
Morgan Noel all expressed support for the broader standard of “relevant and material.” See USC-
RULES-CR-2025-0003-0013 (New York City Bar Association, White Collar Crime Committee);
USC-RULES-CR-2025-0003-0015 (NACDL); USC-RULES-CR-2025-0003-0011 (New York
County Lawyers Association (NYCLA) Federal Courts Committee); USC-RULES-CR-2025-
0003-0005 (Morgan Noel).

        Defense witnesses at both of the Advisory Committee’s meetings in Phoenix and New
York argued that in many districts the Nixon standard was applied so strictly that it was impossible,
as a practical matter, to obtain pretrial subpoenas. In contrast, they stated that the more relaxed
standards worked well in other districts. Despite their strong opposition to this change, the victim



Rules Appendix E - Page 40
        Excerpt from the May 8, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules


advocates provided no information about increased problems in those districts with more relaxed
standards, and similarly the speakers at the New York Advisory Committee meeting in November
2024 who opposed the expansion of Rule 17 did not present information or argue that the problems
they anticipated were already occurring in districts with expanded subpoena practice. Indeed, in
response to Judge Nguyen’s question whether the Department of Justice thought there was a
greater risk to victims and witnesses in districts that interpret Nixon more permissively compared
to districts that have no subpoena practice or interpret Nixon very strictly, Deputy Assistant
Attorney General Lisa Miller “said that she had not noted a trend,” and “Mr. Randall said that he
also did not have a sense of current abuses.” Minutes of Criminal Rules Advisory Committee,
November 6-7, 2024, at 34.

         On this point, the only new element in the post-publication statements and testimony by
the victim advocates is the argument that this change to the Nixon standard would operate in
tandem with the other changes discussed, and thus cumulatively have a serious impact on victims.
Professor Cassell recognized that “[t]he Advisory Committee appears to have believed the
standard was, de facto, the operating rule in some districts[.]” Cassell Revised Statement at 15.
But he responded that “the existing rule—and the incorporated Nixon standard—was tethered to
trials. By specifically expanding the rule to many other proceedings, without the same evidentiary
restrictions associated with trial (e.g., detention and sentencing hearings), the proposed rule clearly
begins to resemble an anything-goes approach.” Id. As noted above, the Subcommittee
recommends no change in the availability of subpoenas for those proceedings.

        The Advisory Committee recommends no changes in 17(c)(2)(B) as published. It
concluded that the issues raised in the comments had been carefully considered during the
development of the published rule, which reflects a compromise between the competing positions.
The districts that already permit the use of subpoenas under a relaxed Nixon standard and those
that allow subpoenas for purposes other than trial do not appear to have experienced the serious
consequences feared by the victim advocates.

       (iii)   Subpoenas for personal or confidential information of persons other than victims

        The Advisory Committee recommends no change in the text of Rule 17(c)(2)(C) as
published, but it does recommend an addition to the committee note for 17(c)(5), as noted above.
Rule 17(c)(2)(C) provides that—with the exception of subpoenas seeking personal or confidential
information about victims and subpoenas sought by self-represented defendants—no motion and
order are required before service unless otherwise required by a local rule or court order. During
the consideration of the amendment, both defense lawyers and judges expressed serious concerns
about the burdens of filing and adjudicating motions for subpoenas, burdens that would increase
substantially if motions and orders were required for additional categories of subpoenas. Because
this provision mediated the workload of both counsel and the courts and expressly left discretion
to require motions for additional subpoenas through local rules or other orders, this provision
received strong support in the Advisory Committee.

        But one commenter, Mr. Wroblewski, argued that the amendments should be revised to
require a motion and court order whenever a subpoena seeks personal or confidential about anyone.
USC-RULES-CR-2025-0003-0003. In Court Review Should Be Required Before Our Personal



                                                                                Rules Appendix E - Page 41
         Excerpt from the May 8, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules


Information is Subpoenaed, a Substack posting submitted as part of his comment, he expressed
great concern about one aspect of the proposal: that except for subpoenas seeking personal or
confidential information about victims, it generally authorizes prosecutors and defense attorneys
to prepare and serve a subpoena “without any motion and thus without any review by a court.” He
noted that when personal or confidential information about a person other than a victim is sought,
the subpoena can be issued without any notice to the person whose information is being sought.
He argued this is troubling for two reasons. First, the rule would provide no protection for personal
privacy and the “unconstitutional use of subpoenas.” And second, the amendment creates an honor
system, in which interested parties determine whether a subpoena they seek meets the standards
set by the amended rule.

        Mr. Wroblewski’s argument was policy based (though he added a constitutional dimension
discussed below). A version of this argument that all subpoenas seeking personal or confidential
information should require a motion and order had been initially persuasive to the subcommittee
when it first drafted a possible amendment that provided more judicial oversight of subpoenas and
protection for individual privacy interests. 9 But judges and practitioners alike expressed strong
views against requiring motions for all subpoenas seeking such protected information. At that
point, the Advisory Committee understood that a proposal requiring motions and a court order for
all subpoenas seeking protected information would generate substantial opposition. Accordingly,
it moved forward with a compromise proposal that required motions, a court order, and notice for
subpoenas seeking personal and confidential information about victims, and it added a requirement
of advance judicial authorization to proceed ex parte as well as a motion for all subpoenas sought
by self-represented defendants. This compromise received unanimous support in the subcommittee
and the full Advisory Committee, and it was approved for publication by the Standing Committee.
Thus Mr. Wrobleski’s policy arguments were, in effect, rejected before publication as part of the
compromises required to obtain full support for the amendments.

        Mr. Wroblewski’s post-publication submission supported his policy arguments with a
constitutional argument based on Carpenter v. United States, 585 U.S. 296 (2018), which held that
the Fourth Amendment required the government to seek a warrant to obtain cell site location
information (CSLI) held by third parties. 10 But Carpenter did not hold that subpoenas in general
are subject to the Fourth Amendment. To the contrary, the Carpenter Court described its decision
as “a narrow one,” 585 U.S. at 316. It emphasized the “detailed, encyclopedic, and effortlessly

9
  The subcommittee’s discussion draft, presented at the Advisory Committee’s November 2024 meeting in New York,
required a motion and order for all Rule 17(c) non-grand jury-subpoenas, and heighted procedures for protected
information, which it defined to include not only personal or confidential information about a victim, but also “[the
type of] information that [may/is likely to be] protected by [a privilege, confidentiality protection, or privacy protection
under federal or state law].” See Discussion Draft of Rule 17, in Agenda Book for Advisory Committee on Criminal
Rules, November 6-7, 2024 at 445-46, lines 21-29. The personal and confidential information Mr. Wroblewski seeks
to protect would fall within that definition.
10
   In a passage cited by Mr. Wroblewski, the Court stated that it “has never held that the Government may subpoena
third parties for records in which the suspect has a reasonable expectation of privacy.” 585 U.S. at 317. Mr.
Wroblewski contends that Carpenter thus established “both that subpoenas implicate the Fourth Amendment—in
some circumstances at least—and that information held by third parties—also in some circumstances—is protected.”
USC-RULES-CR-2025-0003-0003 (emphasis added.)




Rules Appendix E - Page 42
       Excerpt from the May 8, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules


compiled” nature of CSLI records, and the prevalence of cellphones, which could accord the
government “near perfect surveillance” of an individual’s movements. Id. at 309, 312.
Accordingly, the Court ruled that, under the Fourth Amendment, the government must obtain
a search warrant in order to access historical CSLI records. Thus subpoenas seeking CSLI—and
perhaps other broad-scope digital information—raise special (and perhaps unique) privacy
concerns, and the government may have to seek a warrant based on probable cause.

        The Advisory Committee was not persuaded that Carpenter required revising the published
amendment to mandate a motion and order for any subpoena seeking personal or confidential
information about anyone. Few Rule 17 subpoenas will seek information that would be considered
as “detailed and encyclopedic” as the CSLI records in that case. And it is unclear whether court’s
coercive power to enforce a subpoena is sufficient to constitute the state action necessary to bring
the Fourth Amendment into play when a subpoena is sought by a criminal defendant. (If it is, that
argument would seem to apply equally to parties in civil proceedings, who rely on the court’s
power to enforce subpoenas, which issue without requiring a motion or judicial review. See Fed.
R. Civ. P. 45.)

       In any event, under the published rule, any constitutional arguments based on Carpenter
can be raised and adjudicated in particular cases by a motion to quash the subpoena under
Rule 17(c)(2) (renumbered as 17(c)(7) in the published amendment). Additionally, a court
concerned about potential use of subpoenas seeking personal and confidential information of
persons who are not victims can, by local rule or court order, require a motion for any such
subpoena, as many courts already do. The rule as published does not discourage or prevent a court
from adopting the policy Mr. Wroblewski proposed.

        Although the Advisory Committee did not recommend changes to the text, members did
express concern about the wider availability of subpoenas seeking personal or confidential
information about persons other than victims. Members emphasized that there had been no
reported problems in districts where subpoenas are now available without a motion and order, and
the published rule provides courts with multiple options to deal with any concerns, including local
rules or orders that would require a motion and order in particular kinds of cases, or for subpoenas
seeking particular kinds of material or information. On the other hand, the purpose of the
amendments is to expand the availability of subpoenas in other districts, where subpoena practice
has been limited or virtually nonexistent, and thus practice norms and expectations have not
developed.

        The Advisory Committee recognized that there were multiple options for providing an
opportunity for more judicial oversight other than requiring a motion and order, such as requiring
production to the court of all personal or confidential information, requiring the filing of a sealed
notice when a subpoena sought personal or confidential information, an idea offered by Ms.
Ralston, or adopting some states’ practice of allowing the recipient to object in writing without a
lawyer. But many members expressed their view that these options had not been adequately
investigated or vetted, that it was not possible to predict which procedures would be most effective
at protecting privacy, or which would be less burdensome to the courts and the parties, and that
probably republication would be necessary if such a change to the text was adopted.




                                                                              Rules Appendix E - Page 43
         Excerpt from the May 8, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules


        After substantial discussion, the Advisory Committee unanimously agreed that the best
resolution of these concerns was to recommend no change in the text of Rule 17(c)(2)(C) and
instead adopt a three-pronged approach: (1) adding a short statement to the committee note for
(c)(5) about judicial oversight, (2) exploring other avenues to facilitate the development of best
practices, and (3) working with the Federal Judicial Center to monitor the implementation of the
amendments closely to identify any problems as well as the approaches that prove to be most
effective.

        First, the Advisory Committee unanimously recommends this addition to the committee
note to Rule 17(c)(5):

         And to provide greater judicial oversight—for example, for subpoenas requiring the
         production of personal or confidential information—the rule permits a court, by local rule
         or court order, to require the return of such information to chambers before disclosure to
         the requesting party.

        Second, the Advisory Committee will pursue multiple avenues to facilitate best practices.
This includes consideration of revisions to AO form 89B (Subpoena to Produce Documents,
Information, or Objects in a Criminal Case), working with the Bench Book Committee on revisions
addressing the expansion of subpoena authority, and assisting in the prompt development of local
rules and orders.

        Finally, the Advisory Committee will work with the Federal Judicial Center to develop
mechanisms to monitor the practice under the amendments in order to identify any problems that
arise and to identify the approaches—such as local rules and orders—that might be recommended
as best practices.

         (iv)     Expanding the scope of the motion and order requirement for victim information

        Writing on behalf of the Judicial Conference Committee on Criminal Law, Judge Edmond
Chang suggested that Rule 17(c)(3)(A) be amended to require a motion and order when a subpoena
has a “reasonable possibility” of requiring the production of personal or confidential information
about a victim. USC-RULES-CR-2025-0003-0014 at 2. Judge Chang explained that this standard
“will capture a broader set of subpoenas and expand victim protections.” Id. His letter
acknowledged that the Advisory Committee was not aware of any significant misapplication of
the current language. Id. But because the Criminal Law Committee believed it likely that the
proposed amendment would increase the number of subpoenas, his letter expressed concern about
the risk that the current language would be read narrowly as requiring a motion and order only
when the party seeking the subpoena “knows to a certainty that the subpoena will result in the
production of a victim’s personal or confidential information.” Id. (emphasis in original). That, he
wrote, would “inadequately protect[] victim privacy.” Id.

       The Advisory Committee recommends no revision of the published amendment. The
suggested change rests on speculation that the current language of the rule will be read very
narrowly by persons seeking subpoenas for personal or confidential victim information. The
Advisory Committee had no way of assessing the likelihood this would occur. Additionally, the



Rules Appendix E - Page 44
       Excerpt from the May 8, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules


change would probably require publication to gather public comment. Judge Chang’s statement
the revision would “capture a broader set of subpoenas and expand victim protections” suggested
that it may be seen as a significant change.

        The Advisory Committee anticipates that its efforts to develop and facilitate best practices
and the close monitoring it anticipates will allow it to determine whether any changes of this nature
are needed.

       (v)     Requiring the government to give notice to victims

        Writing on behalf of the Judicial Conference Committee on Criminal Law, Judge Edmond
Chang suggested another change in Rule 17(c)(3)(B), specifying that the government must give
notice to the victim when a subpoena seeks personal or confidential information about the victim.
USC-RULES-CR-2025-0003-0014 at 3. His letter stated that this would “align the text’s rule with
actual practice.” Id. Professor Cassell made a similar suggestion, proposing the addition of the
following language to (c)(3):

       (C) Service of any subpoena on an unrepresented victim must be facilitated through counsel
       for the attorney for the government. Service of any subpoena on a represented victim must
       include notice to the attorney for the government.

Cassell Revised Statement at 36.

        The Advisory Committee recommends no change in this provision as published, which
retains the same language about notice that currently appears in (c)(3). Our research found that the
change would not appear to “align” with practice in all districts. In United States v. Ray, 337 F.R.D.
561, 573-74 (S.D.N.Y. 2020), the court held:

       … [I]f the subpoena calls for personal or confidential information of a victim, the Court
       must require that the party requesting to serve the subpoena have given notice to the
       victim—and in ample time for the victim to move to quash or modify—before the subpoena
       is served. It is not sufficient to place the responsibility on the receiving party or just to
       demand reasonable efforts to provide notice.
       ….

       The party requesting authorization for the subpoena to be served also is responsible for
       ensuring that notice has been provided. That is the process under the Federal Rules of Civil
       Procedure, where the party serving the subpoena must provide notice. It also places
       responsibility where that responsibility must logically rest and with the person most
       interested in discharging that responsibility.

It seems unwise to assume that other districts do not follow the same practice (though of course
federal prosecutors and Department of Justice victim/witness coordinators may also provide
notice).




                                                                               Rules Appendix E - Page 45
         Excerpt from the May 8, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules


        The proposal also fails to take account of the situation in which the defense is able to show
good cause for an ex parte application for a subpoena seeking personal or confidential information
about a victim, and although the court or the requesting party provides notice of the subpoena to
the victim, the court orders that it need not be disclosed to the government. The suggestion that
the government must give the victim notice assumes that the government itself will always learn
of the subpoena request before it is issued. It is possible in some cases that the government would
lack this awareness. Thus the Criminal Law Committee’s suggestion appears to be in tension with
the portion of the amendment authorizing ex parte applications for good cause.

        Even if the amendment were modified or interpreted to require that the government always
receive the information required for notice—that is, notice that a subpoena seeking the victim’s
personal and confidential information from X has been requested by the defense—the Criminal
Law Committee’s recommended change may not be warranted. As noted above, it is not clear that
mandating the government always be the one to notify the victim is the universal practice, nor that
relieving the court of all responsibility for determining who must notify the victim is the best
policy. It may or may not be, but the Advisory Committee did not examine this issue when
developing the amendment, nor has it solicited the views of judges, the Department of Justice or
the defense bar about the wisdom of this change.

        Accordingly, republication for public comment and additional Committee consideration
would be desirable if the suggested language were to be added to Rule 17(c)(3)(B). The change to
this key provision in Rule 17 could be substantial, and to date there has been no opportunity for
public comment.

         (vi)     Ex parte subpoenas and gag orders

        Professor Cassell argued that the ex parte provisions would facilitate “gag orders” barring
the victim from consulting with the prosecutor. Cassell Revised Statement at 26-33. Focusing on
subpoenas issued directly to a victim, Professor Cassell explained that for production to be
“effectively ex parte, the recipient of the subpoena must be required not to notify the government.”
Id. at 27. He cited an unreported 2016 case from the District of Columbia Superior Court in which
the court issued such a gag order, and states that he has been informed by victims’ rights
organizations that other such cases exist. Id. Professor Cassell contended that by preventing
victims from conferring with prosecutors such gag orders would violate both the CVRA, 18 U.S.C.
§ 3771(a)(5), and the First Amendment.

         The Advisory Committee recommends no change in Rule 17(c)(2)(E) as published.
Authorizing ex parte applications—which are permitted in other contexts—does not provide a
basis for a gag order restricting the speech of the recipient. The published amendment makes no
change in the existing law concerning gag orders and prior restraints on speech, and it does not
modify or affect the CVRA, 18 U.S.C. § 3771(a)(5), which gives victims “[t]he reasonable right
to confer with the attorney for the Government in the case.” It appears that in federal proceedings
the only example of such an order came in the unreported D.C. Superior Court case noted above.
(It is unclear whether the other orders reported to Professor Cassell by victim organizations were
federal cases.)




Rules Appendix E - Page 46
         Excerpt from the May 8, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules


         (vii)    Clarifying the phrase “personal or confidential”

        NACDL expressed concern that the term “personal or confidential” has not been defined,
leaving the motion and order requirement “open to abuse, to the detriment of defendants’ due
process rights and the legitimate exercise of the defense function.” USC-RULES-CR-2025-0003-
0015 at 4. Accordingly, it suggested that the committee note be amended “to clarify that ‘personal
or confidential,’ as used in this provision, is to be narrowly construed.” Id. NACDL proposed that
“[i]t should be made clear, for example, that criminal history information, security camera footage
in the hands of a third party, non-content telephone toll and usage records, and bank records of an
alleged crime victim, for example, are not ‘personal or confidential’ within the meaning of this
new rule.” Id. at 4-5.

        The Advisory Committee does not recommend this change. It would go far beyond issues
the Advisory Committee considered, and it expresses views the subcommittee has not discussed.
During the development of the published amendment, the Advisory Committee had concluded not
to attempt to define the scope of the term “personal or confidential,” noting no reports that the
phrase “personal or confidential” had been interpreted improperly by courts since its addition in
2008, or that there had been any “abuse” of the motion and order requirement. In addition, early
in the process the Advisory Committee heard testimony that trying to define categories of what is
personal and confidential would require working through a very crowded field of federal, state,
and local laws and regulations defining protections for various information.

         (viii)   Carve-outs to protect victims

        The victim advocates contended if the published rule did move forward—despite their
strong opposition—then two major carve-outs would be needed to limit the impact on victims. It
is not clear where the proposed carve-outs would be located in the rule. The Advisory Committee
does not support the proposed revisions. 11

        Professor Cassell and Ms. Eliason both urged that, if revised, Rule 17 should exclude
violent crime and all sexual offenses (including trafficking cases), as well as domestic violence
and stalking cases. Cassell Revised Statement at 37-38; Eliason Revised Statement at 16-17. They
proposed a definition of violent crime for this purpose drawn largely from U.S.S.G. § 4B1.2(a).
Cassell Revised Statement at 37-38 (suggesting modifications of § 4B1.2(a) and any comparable
state law crimes prosecuted under the Assimilative Crimes Act); Eliason Revised Statement at 16-
17 (suggesting in the alternative that the Advisory Committee could use the definition in 18 U.S.C.
§ 16).


11
  Professor Cassell also urged the Advisory Committee to consider “promulgating rules (or urging the enactment of
statutes) that will assist in the appointment of legal counsel for crime victims who might otherwise be forced to litigate
complicated privacy and other issues pro se.” Cassell Revised Statement at 38. He included a proposed Rule 44.1 to
recognize the court’s discretionary authority to appoint counsel for a victim. Id. at 39.
         Because this suggestion involves the need to promulgate a new rule, the proposal for the appointment of
counsel fell outside the proposed amendments to Rule 17.




                                                                                               Rules Appendix E - Page 47
         Excerpt from the May 8, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules


       The victim advocates stressed that violent crime cases present special privacy-related
concerns, as well as concerns for victim safety, and they do not present the same concerns as the
white collar cases that appear to have motivated the Advisory Committee. They contended that it
would be consistent with the Advisory Committee’s incremental approach to tailor the proposed
amendments to cases not arising from violent crimes.

       The Advisory Committee did not adopt this proposed limitation, which would be a major
departure from the design of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure, which apply to all federal
criminal offenses, though providing some adjustments rules for petty offenses and misdemeanors.
See Fed. R. Crim. P. 58.

        In the alternative, Ms. Eliason urged that Rule 17 should expressly exclude cases from the
District of Columbia “to prevent their application in the DC Court system.” Eliason Revised
Statement at 17. She described a local law passed in 2022 that requires judges in the D.C. Superior
Court to (1) serve the victim with notice of the potential disclosure of confidential information
from eight kinds of professionals (including physicians, mental health professionals, and sexual
assault counselors/advocates) and (2) give the victim fourteen days to object and provide an
explanation for why the disclosure is not in the interest of justice. Id. at 12. It also requires the
court to consider the rights of crime victims under the CVRA in determining whether disclosure
would be in the interest of justice. Id. at 13. Ms. Eliason urged that the amendments to Rule 17
would severely impair victims’ ability to protect their rights in the District of Columbia, whose
local rules generally mirror the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure. Id. at 15. She explained that
the D.C. Code provides that the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure are the default in the District,
and a process must be initiated to reject any amendments to the Federal Rules. Id.

        It is unclear whether the law adopted in 2022 would remain applicable if the proposed
amendments to Rule 17 go into effect. In the hearing, Ms. Eliason suggested that victim advocates
would argue it would remain in effect. See Jan. 22, 2026 Tr. of Hr’gs on Prop. Amends. to Rule
17 at 18 (stating “[e]ven if Rule 17 in the District Superior Court gets amended to reflect the federal
rules, we will have a District law that essentially our argument would be overrides the federal—
or, sorry, the District’s rule that reflects the federal rule”).

         The Advisory Committee also declined to add this proposed limitation, which would be a
major departure from the design of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure, which apply in all
districts. Their application to cases in the D.C. Superior Courts is governed by District of Columbia
Code § 11-946, which states that “[t]he Superior Court shall conduct its business according to the
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure and the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure (except as otherwise
provided in Title 23) unless it prescribes and adopts rules which modify those Rules.”). Thus the
D.C. Code itself provides a procedure for reviving or preserving the protections afforded by the
law that was adopted in 2022.

         (ix)     Information that is not subject to subpoena

      Rule 17(h)—the last subsection of the Rule—governs information that is not subject to
subpoena, and states that Rule 26.2 governs.




Rules Appendix E - Page 48
       Excerpt from the May 8, 2026 Report of the Advisory Committee on Criminal Rules


        The New York City Bar Association’s White Collar Crime Committee urged consideration
of a revision to Rule 17(h) to address what it describes as an error that occurred in the 2002
restyling of the Rule, inadvertently extending the provision which had been based on the Jencks
Act, 18 U.S.C. § 3500, and Rule 26.2 to the production of witness statements held by third parties.
USC-RULES-CR-2025-0003-0013. NACDL also supported this proposal. USC-RULES-CR-
2025-0003-0015 at 5. The Jencks Act and Rule 26.2 address only statements possessed by the
government or the defense.

       The White Collar Crime Committee noted that the 2002 restyling was not intended to effect
any substantive change, but nonetheless courts have taken different positions on the question
whether Rule 17(h) now bars subpoenas for witness statements held by third parties, rather than
the government or the defense.

       The Advisory Committee declined to make the proposed change to the rule as published.
This issue was not among those raised by practitioners (and judges) during the Advisory
Committee’s sessions in Phoenix and New York, was not debated in the subcommittee and full
Advisory Committee, and was not included in the package now under consideration. Because the
provision is at least arguably significant and there has been no public input, its inclusion at this
point would require republication of the entire amendment.

       (x)     Requirements for self-represented parties

        Rule 17(c)(4) governs subpoenas sought by self-represented parties, requiring them to file
a motion, make the showing required in (2)(D), and obtain an order before serving a subpoena.
One commentor, Mitchell Berger, questioned why self-represented parties appear to be treated
differently under the proposed amended Rule 17. USC-RULES-CR-2025-0003-0012. He argued
that requiring pro se parties to file a motion, make the showing, and obtain an order subjects them
to a higher standard than represented parties, potentially undermining their Sixth Amendment
rights.

        The Advisory Committee recommends no change in (c)(4). It reflects a deliberate choice
to avoid the potential for abuse by persons who lack legal training and are not bound by the ethical
rules that would deter misuse of the court’s compulsory authority. Moreover, because subpoenas
sought by unrepresented defendants comprise a very small subset, the motion and order
requirement in those cases would not add significantly to the courts’ burden.

                                             *****




                                                                              Rules Appendix E - Page 49
